
one hundred thirty-six days before
the week before I left my family and Florida and the
rest of my minor life to go to boarding school in Alabama, my mother insisted on throwing me a goingaway party. To say that I had lowexpectations would be
to underestimate the matter dramatically. Although I was more or less forced to invite allmy "school friends,"i.e.,
theragtag bunch of drama peopleand English geeks I sat with by social necessity in the cavernous cafeteria of my
public school, I knew they wouldn't come. Still, my mother persevered, awash in the delusion that I had kept my popularity secret from her all these years. She
my popularity secret from her all these years. She
cooked asmallmountain ofartichoke dip. Shefestooned
our living roomin green and yellow streamers, the colors
of my new school. She bought two dozen champagne
poppers and placed themaround the edge of our coffee
table.
And when that final Friday came, when my packing was mostly done, she sat with my dad and me on the livingroomcouch at 4:56
P.M. and patiently awaited the arrival of the Good-bye
to Miles Cavalry. Said cavalry consisted of exactly two
people: Marie Lawson, a tiny blonde with rectangular
glasses, and her chunky (to put it charitably) boyfriend, Will.
"Hey, Miles,"Mariesaid as shesat down.
"Hey,"I said.
"Howwas your summer?"Willasked.
"Okay. Yours?"
"Good. We did Jesus Christ Superstar. I helped with
thesets. Marie did lights,"said Will.
"That's cool." I nodded knowingly, and that about
exhausted our conversational topics. I might have asked
a question aboutJesus Christ Superstar, except that 1.
I didn't know what it was, and 2. I didn't care to learn,
and 3. I never really excelled at small talk. My mom,
however, can talk small for hours, and so she extended
the awkwardness by asking them about their rehearsal
schedule, and how the show had gone, and whether it wasasuccess.
"I guess it was," Marie said. "A lot of people came, I
"I guess it was," Marie said. "A lot of people came, I
guess."Marie was thesort of person to guessalot.
Finally, Will said, "Well, we just dropped by to say
good-bye. I've got to get Marie home by six. Havefun at
boarding school, Miles."
"Thanks," I answered, relieved. The only thing worse
than having a party that no one attends is having a party
attended only by two vastly, deeply uninteresting people.
They left, and so I sat with my parents and stared at the
blank TVand wanted to turn it on but knewI shouldn't. I
could feel them both looking at me, waiting for me to
burst into tears or something, as if I hadn't known all
along that it would go precisely like this. But I had
known. I could feel their pity as they scooped artichoke
dip with chips intended for my imaginary friends, but they
needed pity more than I did: I wasn't disappointed. My
expectations had beenmet.
"Is this why youwant to leave, Miles?"Momasked.
I mulled it over for a moment, careful not to look at her.
"Uh, no,"I said.
"Well, why then?"she asked. This was not the first time
she had posed the question. Mom was not particularly
keen on letting me go to boarding schooland had made
no secret ofit.
"Because of me?" my dad asked. He had attended
Culver Creek, the same boarding school to which I was
headed, as had both of his brothersand all oftheir kids. I
think he liked the idea of me following in his footsteps. My uncles had told mestoriesabout howfamous my dad
had been on campus for having simultaneously raised hell
and aced all his classes. That sounded like a better life
than the oneI had in Florida.
But no, it wasn't because ofDad. Notexactly.
"Hold on,"I said. I went into Dad's study and found his
biography of Frangois Rabelais. I liked reading
biographies of writers, even if (as was the case with Monsieur Rabelais) I'd never read any of their actual writing. I flipped to the back and found the highlighted
quote ("NEVER USE A HIGHLIGHTER IN MY
BOOKS," my dad had told me a thousand times. But
how else are you supposed to find what you're looking
for?).
"So this guy,"I said, standing in the doorway ofthe living
room.
"Francois Rabelais. He was this poet.And his last words were 'I go to seek a Great Perhaps.' That's why I'm
going. So I don't haveto wait untilI dieto start seeking a Great Perhaps."
And that quieted them. I was after a Great Perhaps, and
they knew as well as I did that I wasn't going to find it with the likes of Willand Marie. I sat back down on the
couch, between my mom and my dad, and my dad put
his arm around me, and we stayed there like that, quiet
on the couch together, for a long time, until it seemed
okay to turn on the TV, and then we ate artichoke dip
for dinner and watched the History Channel, and as
going-away parties go, it certainly could have been worse.
one hundred twenty-eight days before
Florida was plenty hot, certainly, and humid, too. Hot
enough that your clothes stuck to you like Scotch tape,
and sweat dripped like tears from your forehead into
your eyes. But it was only hot outside, and generally I
only went outside to walk from one air-conditioned
only went outside to walk from one air-conditioned
location to another.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 7 of 88
This did not prepare me for the unique sort of heat that
one encounters fifteen miles south of Birmingham, Alabama, at Culver Creek Preparatory School. My
parents' SUV was parked in the grass just a few feet
outside my dormroom, Room43. But each time I took
those few steps to and fromthe car to unload what now
seemed like far too much stuff, the sun burned through my clothes and into my skin with a vicious ferocity that made me genuinely fear hellfire.
Between Mom and Dad and me, it only took a few minutes to unload thecar, butmy unair-conditioned dorm
room, although blessedly out of the sunshine, was only modestly cooler. The room surprised me: I'd pictured
plush carpet, wood-paneled walls, Victorian furniture. Aside from one luxury—a private bathroom—I got a
box. With cinder-block walls coated thick with layers of white paint and a green-and-white-checkered linoleum
floor, the placelooked morelikea hospitalthan the dorm
room of my fantasies. A bunk bed of unfinished wood with vinylmattresses was pushed against theroom's back window. The desks and dressers and bookshelves were
allattached to the walls in order to preventcreative floor
planning. And no air-conditioning.
I sat on the lower bunk while Mom opened the trunk,
grabbed astack ofthe biographies my dad had agreed to
part with,and placed themon the bookshelves.
"I can unpack, Mom," I said. My dad stood. He was
ready to go.
ready to go.
"Letmeat leastmake your bed,"Momsaid.
"No, really. I can do it. It's okay." Because you simply
cannot drawthesethings out forever.At some point, you
just pull off the Band-Aid and it hurts, but then it's over
and you'rerelieved.
"God, we'll miss you," Mom said suddenly, stepping
through the minefield of suitcases to get to the bed. I
stood and hugged her.
My dad walked over, too, and we formed a sort of
huddle. It was too hot, and we were too sweaty, for the
hug to last terribly long. I knew I ought to cry, but I'd
lived with my parents for sixteen years, and a trial
separation seemed overdue.
"Don't worry."I smiled. "I'sa-gonnalearn howt'talk right
Southern."Momlaughed.
"Don't do anything stupid,"my dad said.
"Okay."
"No drugs. No drinking. No cigarettes."As an alumnus
ofCulver Creek, he had donethethings I had only heard
about: the secret parties, streaking through hay fields (he
always whined about how it was all boys back then),
drugs, drinking, and cigarettes. It had taken hima while
to kick smoking, but his badass days were now well
behind him.
"I love you," they both blurted out simultaneously. It
needed to be said, but the words made the whole thing
horribly uncomfortable, like watching your grandparents
kiss.
"I love you, too. I'llcallevery Sunday." Our rooms had
no phonelines, butmy parents had requested I be placed
in aroomnear one ofCulver Creek's five pay phones.
They hugged me again—Mom, then Dad—and it was
over. Out the back window, I watched them drive the winding road off campus. I should have felt a gooey,
sentimentalsadness, perhaps. But mostly I just wanted to
cool off, so I grabbed one of the desk chairs and sat
down outside my door in the shade of the overhanging
eaves, waiting for a breeze that never arrived. The air
outside sat as still and oppressive as the air inside. I
stared out over my new digs: Six one-story buildings,
each with sixteen dorm rooms, were arranged in a
hexagramaround alargecircle of grass. It looked likean
oversize old motel. Everywhere, boys and girls hugged
and smiled and walked together. I vaguely hoped that
someone would come up and talk to me. I imagined the
conversation:
"Hey. Is this your first year?"
"Yeah. Yeah. I'mfromFlorida."
"That'scool. So you're used to the heat."
"I wouldn't be used to this heat ifI werefromHades,"I'd
joke. I'd make a good first impression. Oh, he's funny.
That guy Miles is a riot.
That didn't happen, of course. Things never happened
likeI imagined them.
Bored, I went back inside, took off my shirt, lay down
on the heat-soaked vinyl ofthelower bunk mattress, and
closed my eyes. I'd never been born again with the
baptism and weeping and all that, but it couldn't feel much better than being born again as a guy with no
much better than being born again as a guy with no
known past. I thought of the people I'd read about—
JohnF. Kennedy, James Joyce, Humphrey Bogart—who went to boarding school, and their adventures—
Kennedy, for example, loved pranks. I thought of the Great Perhaps and the things that might happen and the
peopleI might meetand who my roommate might be(I'd
gotten a letter a few weeks before that gave me his
name, Chip Martin, but no other information). Whoever Chip Martin was, I hoped to God he would bring an
arsenal of high-powered fans, because I hadn't packed
even one, and I could already feel my sweat pooling on
the vinyl mattress, which disgusted me so much that I
stopped thinking and got off my ass to find a towel to wipe up thesweat with. And then I thought, Well, before
the adventurecomes the unpacking.
I managed to tapea map ofthe world to the walland get most ofmy clothes into drawers before I noticed that the
hot, moist air made even the walls sweat, and I decided
that now was not the time for manual labor. Now was
thetimefora magnificently cold shower.
The small bathroom contained a huge, full-length mirror
behind the door, and so I could notescape the reflection
of my naked self as I
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 8 of 88
leaned in to turn on the shower faucet. My skinniness
always surprised me: My thin arms didn't seem to get much bigger as they moved from wrist to shoulder, my
chest lacked any hint of either fat or muscle, and I felt
embarrassed and wondered if something could be done
about the mirror. I pulled open the plain white shower
curtain and ducked into thestall.
Unfortunately, theshower seemed to have been designed
for someone approximately three feet, seven inches tall,
so the cold water hit my lower rib cage—with all the
force of a dripping faucet. To wet my sweat-soaked
face, I had to spread my legsand squatsignificantly.
Surely, John F. Kennedy (who was six feet tallaccording
to his biography, my height exactly) did not have to
squat at his boarding school. No, this was a different
beastentirely, and as the dribbling shower slowly soaked my body, I wondered whether I could find a Great
Perhaps here at all or whether I had made a grand miscalculation.
When I opened the bathroom door after my shower, a
towelwrapped around mywaist, I sawa short, muscular
guy with a shock of brown hair. He was hauling a
gigantic army-green duffel bag through the door of my
room. He stood five feet and nothing, but was well-built,
like a scale model of Adonis, and with him arrived the
stink of stale cigarette smoke. Great, I thought. I'm
meeting my roommate naked. He heaved the duffel
into theroom,closed the door,and walked over to me.
"I'm Chip Martin," he announced in a deep voice, the
voice of a radio deejay. Before I could respond, he
added, "I'd shake your hand, but I think you should hold
on damn tight to that towel till you can get some clothes
on."
I laughed and nodded my head at him(that's cool, right?
the nod?)and said, "I'mMiles Halter. Niceto meet you."
"Miles,as in 'to go beforeI sleep'?"heasked me.
"Huh?"
"It'sa Robert Frost poem. You've never read him?"
"It'sa Robert Frost poem. You've never read him?"
I shook my head no.
"Consider yourselflucky."Hesmiled.
I grabbed some clean underwear, a pair of blue Adidas
soccer shorts, and a white T-shirt, mumbled that I'd be
back in a second, and ducked back into the bathroom.
So much fora good first impression.
"So where are your parents?" I asked from the
bathroom.
"My parents? Thefather's inCaliforniaright now. Maybe
sitting in his La-Z-Boy. Maybe driving his truck. Either way, he's drinking.
Mymother is probably just nowturning offcampus."
"Oh," I said, dressed now, not sure how to respond to
such personal information. I shouldn't have asked, I
guess, ifI didn't want to know.
Chip grabbed some sheets and tossed themonto the top
bunk. "I'm a top bunk man. Hope that doesn't bother
you."
"Uh, no. Whatever is fine."
"I see you've decorated the place," he said, gesturing
toward the world map. "I likeit."
And then he started naming countries. He spoke in a monotone,as if he'd doneitathousand times before.
Afghanistan.
Albania.
Algeria.
Algeria.
American Samoa.
Andorra.
And so on. He got through the A's beforelooking up and
noticingmy incredulous stare.
"I could do the rest, but it'd probably bore you.
Something I learned over the summer. God, you can't
imagine how boring New Hope, Alabama, is in the
summertime. Like watching soybeans grow. Where are
you from, by the way?"
"Florida,"I said.
"Never been."
"That's pretty amazing, thecountries thing,"I said.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 9 of 88
"Yeah, everybody's got a talent. I can memorize things. And you can...?"
"Urn, I know a lot of people's last words." It was an
indulgence, learning last words. Other people had
chocolate; I had dying declarations.
"Example?"
"I like Henrik Ibsen's. He wasa playwright."I knewalot
about Ibsen, but I'd never read any of his plays. I didn't
likereading plays. I liked reading biographies.
"Yeah, I knowwho he was,"said Chip.
"Yeah, I knowwho he was,"said Chip.
"Right, well, he'd been sick for a while and his nurse said
to him,
'You seem to be feeling better this morning/ and Ibsen
looked at her and said, Òn the contrary,' and then he
died."
Chip laughed. "That's morbid. But I likeit."
He told me he was in his third year at Culver Creek. He
had started in ninth grade, thefirst yearat theschool, and was nowajunior like me. Ascholarship kid, hesaid. Got
a fullride. He'd heard it was the best school inAlabama,
so he wrote his application essay about how he wanted
to go to a school where he could read long books. The
problem, he said in the essay, was that his dad would
always hit himwith the books in his house, so Chip kept
his books short and paperback for his own safety. His
parents got divorced his sophomore year. He liked "the Creek,"as he called it, but "You have to be careful here, with students and with teachers. And I do hate being
careful." He smirked. I hated being careful, too—or wanted to,at least.
He told me this while ripping through his duffel bag,
throwing clothes into drawers with reckless abandon. Chip did not believe in having a sock drawer ora T-shirt
drawer. He believed that all drawers were created equal
and filled each with whatever fit. Mymother would have
died.
As soon as he finished "unpacking," Chip hit me roughly
on the shoulder, said, "I hope you're stronger than you
look," and walked out the door, leaving it open behind
him. He peeked his head back in afewseconds laterand
saw me standing still. "Well, come on, Miles To Go Halter. We gotshit to do."
Halter. We gotshit to do."
We made our way to the TV room, which according to Chip contained the only cable TV on campus. Over the
summer, it served as a storage unit. Packed nearly to the
ceiling with couches, fridges, and rolled-up carpets, the TV room undulated with kids trying to find and haul
away their stuff. Chip said hello to a few people but
didn't introduce me. As he wandered through the couchstocked maze, I stood near the room's entrance, trying my best not to block pairs of roommates as they maneuvered furniturethrough the narrowfront door.
It took tenminutes for Chip to find his stuff, and an hour more for us to make four trips back and forth across the
dormcircle between the TV roomand Room43. By the
end, I wanted to crawl into Chip's minifridge and sleep
for a thousand years, but Chip seemed immune to both
fatigueand heatstroke. I sat down on hiscouch.
"I found it lying on a curb in my neighborhood a couple
years ago," he said of the couch as he worked on setting
up my PlayStation 2
on top of his footlocker. "I know the leather's got some
cracks, but come on. That's a damn nice couch." The
leather had more than a few cracks—it was about 30
percent baby blue faux leather and 70 percent foam—
but it felt damn good to meanyway.
"Allright," he said. "We're about done."He walked over
to his desk and pulled a roll of duct tape froma drawer.
"Wejust need your trunk."
I got up, pulled the trunk out from under the bed, and
Chip situated it between the couch and the PlayStation 2
and started tearing offthin strips of duct tape. Heapplied
them to the trunk so that they spelled out COFFEE
TABLE.
TABLE.
"There," he said. He sat down and put his feet up on the,
uh,coffeetable. "Done."
I sat down next to him, and he looked over at me and
suddenly said, "Listen. I'mnot going to be your entree to Culver Creek sociallife."
"Uh, okay," I said, but I could hear the words catch in my throat. I'd just carried this guy's couch beneath a white-hotsun and nowhe didn't like me?
"Basically you've got two groups here," he explained,
speakingwith increasing urgency. "You've got theregular
boarders, like me, and then you've got the Weekday Warriors; they board here, but they're all rich kids who
live in Birmingham and go home to their parents' airconditioned mansions every weekend. Those are the
cool kids. I don't like them, and they don't like me, and
so if you came here thinking that you were hot shit at
public schoolso you'll be hot shit here, you'd best not be
seenwithme. You did go to publicschool, didn't you?"
"Uh..." I said. Absentmindedly, I began picking at the
cracks in the couch's leather, digging my fingers into the
foamywhiteness.
"Right, you did, probably, because if you had gone to a
privateschool your freakin' shorts would fit."Helaughed.
I wore my shorts just below my hips, which I thought was cool. Finally I said, "Yeah, I went to public school. But I wasn't hotshit there, Chip. I was regular shit."
"Ha! That's good. And don't call me Chip. Call me the Colonel."
I stifled alaugh. "The Colonel?"
I stifled alaugh. "The Colonel?"
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 10 of 88
"Yeah. The Colonel. And we'llcall you...hmm. Pudge."
"Huh?"
"Pudge," the Colonel said. "Because you're skinny. It's
called irony, Pudge. Heard of it? Now, let's go get some
cigarettesand start this year offright."
He walked out of the room, again just assuming I'd
follow, and this time I did. Mercifully, the sun was
descending toward the horizon.
We walked five doors down to Room 48. A dry-erase
board was taped to the door using duct tape. In blue marker, it read:Alaska has a single!
The Colonel explained to me that 1. this was Alaska's
room, and that 2. she had a single roombecause the girl who was supposed to be her roommate got kicked out
at the end of last year, and that 3. Alaska had cigarettes,
although the Colonel neglected to ask whether 4. I
smoked, which 5. I didn't.
He knocked once, loudly. Through the door, a voice
screamed, "Oh my God come in you short little man
becauseI havethe beststory."
We walked in. I turned to closethe door behind me, and
the Colonel shook his head and said, "After seven, you
haveto leavethe door open if you'rein a girl's room,"but
I barely heard himbecause the hottest girl in all of human
history was standing before me in cutoff jeans and a
peach tank top. And she was talking over the Colonel,
peach tank top. And she was talking over the Colonel,
talking loud and fast.
"So first day of summer, I'm in grand old Vine Station with this boy named Justin and we're at his house watchingTVon thecouch—
and mind you, I'malready dating Jake—actually I'mstill
dating him, miraculously enough, but Justin is a friend of mine fromwhen I was a kid and so we're watching TV
and literally chatting about the SATs or something, and
Justin puts his arm around me and I think, Oh that's
nice, we've been friends for so long and this is totally
comfortable, and we're just chatting and then I'min the middle of a sentence about analogies or something and
like a hawk he reaches down and he honks my boob. HONK. Amuch-too-firm, two-to three-second HONK. And the first thing I thought was Okay, how do I
extricate this claw from my boob before it leaves
permanent marks? and the second thing I thought was God, Ican't wait to tell Takumi and the Colonel."
The Colonel laughed. I stared, stunned partly by the
force of the voice emanating from the petite (but God,
curvy) girland partly by the gigantic stacks of books that
lined her walls. Her library filled her bookshelves and
then overflowed into waist-high stacks of books
everywhere, piled haphazardly against the walls. If just
one of them moved, I thought, the domino effect could
engulfthethree of us in an asphyxiatingmass ofliterature.
"Who's the guy that's not laughing at my very funny
story?"sheasked.
"Oh, right. Alaska, this is Pudge. Pudge memorizes
people's last words. Pudge, this is Alaska. She got her
boob honked over the summer." She walked over to me with her hand extended, then made a quick move
downward at the last moment and pulled down my
downward at the last moment and pulled down my
shorts.
"Thosearethe biggestshorts in thestate ofAlabama!"
"I likethembaggy,"I said, embarrassed, and pulled them
up. They had been cool back homein Florida.
"So far in our relationship, Pudge, I've seen your chicken
legs entirely too often," the Colonel deadpanned. "So, Alaska. Sell us somecigarettes."And then somehow, the Colonel talked me into paying five dollars for a pack of Marlboro Lights I had no intention ofever smoking.
He asked Alaska to join us, but she said, "I have to find Takumiand tell himabout The Honk." She turned to me
and asked, "Have you seen him?"I had no idea whether
I'd seen Takumi, since I had no idea who he was. I just
shook my head.
"All right. Meet ya at the lake in a few minutes, then." The Colonel nodded.
At the edge of the lake, just before the sandy (and, the Colonel told me, fake) beach, we sat down in an Adirondack swing. I made the obligatory joke: "Don't
grab my boob." The Colonel gave an obligatory laugh,
then asked, "Want a smoke?" I had never smoked a
cigarette, but when inRome...
"Is itsafe here?"
"Not really," he said, then lit a cigarette and handed it to me. I inhaled. Coughed. Wheezed. Gasped for breath. Coughed again.
Considered vomiting. Grabbed the swinging bench, head
spinning, and threw the cigarette to the ground and
stomped on it, convinced my Great Perhaps did not
stomped on it, convinced my Great Perhaps did not
involvecigarettes.
"Smoke much?" He laughed, then pointed to a white
speck across thelakeand said, "Seethat?"
"Yeah,"I said. "What is that? Abird?"
"It's theswan,"hesaid.
"Wow. Aschoolwith aswan. Wow."
"That swan is the spawn of Satan. Never get closer to it
thanweare now."
"Why?"
"It has some issues with people. It was abused or
something. It'llrip you to pieces. The Eagle put it thereto
keep us fromwalking around thelaketo smoke."
"The Eagle?"
"Mr. Starnes. Code name: the Eagle. The dean of
students. Most oftheteachers live on campus, and they'll
all bust you. But only the
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 11 of 88
Eagle lives in the dorm circle, and he sees all. He can
smellacigarettefromlikefive miles."
"Isn't his house back there?" I asked, pointing to it. I
could seethe house quiteclearly despitethe darkness, so
it followed hecould probably see us.
"Yeah, but he doesn't really go into blitzkrieg mode until
classes start,"Chip said nonchalantly.
"God, ifI get in trouble my parents will killme,"I said.
"I suspect you're exaggerating. But look, you're going to
get in trouble. Ninety-nine percent of the time, your
parents never have to know, though. The school doesn't want your parents to think you became a fuckup here
any more than you want your parents to think you're a
fuckup." He blew a thin stream of smoke forcefully
toward the lake. I had to admit:He looked cool doing it. Taller, somehow. "Anyway, when you get in trouble, just
don't tell on anyone. I mean, I hate the rich snots here with a fervent passion I usually reserve only for dental work and my father. But that doesn't mean I would rat
them out. Pretty much the only important thing is never
never never never rat."
"Okay," I said, although I wondered: If someone
punches me in the face, I'm supposed to insist that I
ran into a door? It seemed a little stupid. How do you
deal with bullies and assholes if you can't get them into
trouble?I didn'task Chip, though.
"All right, Pudge. We have reached the point in the
eveningwhen I'mobliged to go and find my girlfriend. So
give me a few of those cigarettes you'll never smoke
anyway,and I'llsee you later."
I decided to hang out on the swing for a while, half
because the heat had finally dissipated into a pleasant, if muggy, eighty-something, and half because I thought Alaska might show up. But almost as soon as the Colonel left, the bugs encroached: no-see-ums (which,
for the record, you can see) and mosquitoes hovered
around me in such numbers that the tiny noise of their
rubbing wings sounded cacophonous. And then I
decided to smoke.
Now, I did think, Thesmoke will drivethe bugs away. And, to some degree, it did. I'd be lying, though, if I
claimed I became a smoker to ward off insects. I
became a smoker because 1. I was on an Adirondack
swing bymyself, and 2. I had cigarettes, and 3. I figured
that if everyone else could smoke a cigarette without
coughing, Icould damnwell, too. In short, I didn't havea
very good reason. So yeah, let's just say that 4. it was
the bugs.
I madeit through threeentire drags beforeI felt nauseous
and dizzy and only semipleasantly buzzed. I got up to
leave. As I stood,a voice behind mesaid:
"So do you reallymemorizelast words?"
She ran up beside me and grabbed my shoulder and
pushed me back onto the porch swing.
"Yeah,"I said. And then hesitantly, I added, "You want
to quizme?"
"JFK,"shesaid.
"That's obvious,"Ianswered.
"Oh, is it now?"sheasked.
"No. Those were his last words. Someone said, `Mr.
President, you can't say Dallas doesn't love you,' and
then hesaid, 'That's obvious,'
and then he gotshot."
She laughed. "God, that's awful. I shouldn't laugh. But I will," and then she laughed again. "Okay, Mr. Famous Last Words Boy. I have one for you." She reached into
her overstuffed backpack and pulled out a book.
"Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The General in His
"Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The General in His
Labyrinth.
Absolutely one of my favorites. It's about Simon Bolivar."I didn't know who Simon Bolivar was, but she
didn't give me time to ask. "It's a historical novel, so I
don't know if this is true, but in the book, do you know
what his last words are? No, you don't. But I amabout
to tell you, Senor PartingRemarks."
And then she lit a cigarette and sucked on it so hard for
so long that I thought theentirethingmight burn offin one
drag. Sheexhaled and read to me:
"' He'—that's Simon Bolivar—*was shaken by the
overwhelming revelation that the headlong race between
his misfortunes and his dreams was at that moment
reaching thefinish line. Therest was darkness. "Damn it,"
hesighed. "HowwillIever get out ofthis labyrinth!'""
I knew great last words when I heard them, and I made
a mental note to get ahold of a biography of this Simon Bolivar fellow.
Beautiful last words, but I didn't quite understand. "So what's thelabyrinth?"Iasked her.
And now is as good a time as any to say that she was
beautiful. In the dark beside me, she smelled of sweat
and sunshine and vanilla, and on that thin-mooned night I
could see little more than her silhouette except for when
she smoked, when the burning cherry of the cigarette washed her face in pale red light. But even in the dark, I
could see hereyes—fierceemeralds. She had the kind of
eyes that predisposed you to supporting her every
endeavor. And not just beautiful, but hot, too, with her
breasts straining against her tight tank top, her curved
legs swinging back and forth beneath theswing, flip-flops
dangling fromher electric-blue-painted toes. It was right
dangling fromher electric-blue-painted toes. It was right
then, between when I asked about the labyrinth and when sheanswered me, that I realized theimportance of
curves, of the thousand places where girls' bodies ease
fromone place to another, fromarc of the foot to ankle
to calf, fromcalf to hip to waist to breast to neck to skislope nose to forehead to shoulder to the concave arch
of the back to the butt to the etc. I'd noticed curves
before, of course, but I had never quite apprehended
their significance.
Her mouth close enough to me that I could feel her
breathwarmer than the air, she said, "That's the mystery,
isn't it? Is the labyrinth living or dying? Which is he trying
to escape—the world or the end of it?"I waited for her
to keep talking, but after a while it became obvious
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 12 of 88
she wanted an answer.
"Uh, I don't know,"I said finally. "Have you really read
allthose books in your room?"
She laughed. "Oh God no. I've maybe read a third of
'em. But I'mgoing to read them all. I call it my Life's Library. Every summer since I was little, I've gone to
garage sales and bought all the books that looked
interesting. So I always have something to read. But
there is so much to do:cigarettes to smoke, sex to have,
swings to swing on. I'll have more time for reading when
I'mold and boring."
She told me that I reminded her of the Colonel when he
came to Culver Creek. They were freshmen together,
she said, both scholarship kids with, as she put it, "a
shared interest in booze and mischief."The phrase booze
shared interest in booze and mischief."The phrase booze
and mischief left me worrying I'd stumbled into what my mother referred to as "the wrong crowd," but for the wrong crowd, they both seemed awfully smart. As she lit
a new cigarette off the butt of her previous one, she told me that the Colonel was smart but hadn't done much
livingwhen he got to the Creek.
"I got rid of that problem quickly." She smiled. "By November, I'd gotten him his first girlfriend, a perfectly
nice non-Weekday Warrior named Janice. He dumped
her after a month because she was too rich for his
poverty-soaked blood, but whatever. We pulled our first
prank that year—we filled Classroom4 with a thin layer
of marbles. We've progressed some since then, of
course."Shelaughed. So Chip becamethe Colonel—the military-style planner of their pranks, and Alaska was
ever Alaska, the larger-than-life creative force behind
them.
"You're smart like him,"she said. "Quieter, though. And
cuter, but I didn't even just say that, because I love my
boyfriend."
"Yeah, you're not bad either," I said, overwhelmed by
hercompliment. "But I didn't just say that, becauseI love my girlfriend. Oh, wait. Right. I don't have one."
She laughed. "Yeah, don't worry, Pudge. If there's one
thing I can get you, it's a girlfriend. Let's make a deal: You figure out what thelabyrinth isand howto get out of
it,and I'll get you laid."
"Deal."Weshook on it.
Later, I walked toward the dorm circle beside Alaska. The cicadas hummed their one-note song, just as they
had at home in Florida. She turned to me as we made
our way through the darkness and said, "When you're
our way through the darkness and said, "When you're walking at night, do you ever get creeped out and even
though it's silly and embarrassing you just want to run
home?"
It seemed too secret and personal to admit to a virtual
stranger, but I told her, "Yeah, totally."
For a moment, she was quiet. Then she grabbed my
hand, whispered, "Run run run run run," and took off,
pullingme behind her.
one hundred twenty-seven days before
early the next afternoon, I blinked sweat from my
eyes as I taped a van Gogh poster to the back of the
door. The Colonel sat on the couch judging whether the
poster was leveland fielding my endless questions about Alaska. What's her story? "She's from Vine Station. You could drive past it without noticing—and fromwhat
I understand, you ought to. Her boyfriend'sat Vanderbilt
on scholarship. Plays bass in some band. Don't know much about her family." So she really likes him? "I
guess. She hasn't cheated on him, which is a first."And
so on. All morning, I'd been unable to care about
anything else, not the van Gogh poster and not video
games and not even my class schedule, which the Eagle
had brought by thatmorning. Heintroduced himself, too:
"Welcome to Culver Creek, Mr. Halter. You're given a
large measure of freedom here. If you abuse it, you'll
regret it. You seem like a nice young man. I'd hate to
haveto bid you farewell."
And then he stared at me in a manner that was either
serious or seriouslymalicious. "Alaskacalls that the Look
of Doom,"the Colonel told me after the Eagle left. "The
next time you seethat, you're busted."
"Okay, Pudge,"the Colonelsaid as I stepped away from
the poster. Not entirely level, but close enough. "Enough with the Alaska already. By my count, there are ninetytwo girls at this school, and every last one of themis less
crazy than Alaska, who, I might add, already has a
boyfriend. I'm going to lunch. It's bufriedo day." He walked out, leaving the door open. Feeling like an
overinfatuated idiot, I got up to close the door. The Colonel, already halfway across the dorm circle, turned
around. "Christ. Are you coming or what?"
You can say a lot of bad things about Alabama, but you
can't say thatAlabamansasa peopleare unduly afraid of
deep fryers. In that first week at the Creek, the cafeteria
served fried chicken, chicken-fried steak, and fried okra, which marked my first foray into the delicacy that is the
fried vegetable. I half expected them to fry the iceberg
lettuce. But nothingmatched the bufriedo, a dish created
by Maureen, the amazingly (and understandably) obese Culver Creek cook. A deep-fried bean burrito, the
bufriedo proved beyond the shadow of a doubt that
frying always improves a food. Sitting with the Colonel
and five guys I didn't know at a circular table in the
cafeteria that afternoon, I sank my teeth into the crunchy
shell of my first bufriedo and experienced a culinary
orgasm. My mom cooked okay, but I immediately wanted to bring Maureen home with me over Thanksgiving.
The Colonel introduced me (as "Pudge") to the guys at
the wobblywooden table, but I only registered the name Takumi, whomAlaska had mentioned yesterday. A thin
Japanese guy only a few inches taller than the Colonel, Takumi talked with his mouth full as I chewed slowly,
savoring the beany crunch.
"God," Takumisaid to me, "there's nothing like watching
a man eat his first bufriedo."
a man eat his first bufriedo."
I didn't saymuch—partly because no one asked me any
questions and partly because I just wanted to eat as much as I could. But Takumi felt no such modesty—he
could,and did,eatand chewand swallowwhiletalking.
The lunch discussion centered on the girl who was
supposed to have beenAlaska's roommate, Marya, and
her boyfriend, Paul, who had
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 13 of 88
been a Weekday Warrior. They'd gotten kicked out in
the last week of the previous school year, I learned, for what the Colonelcalled
"the Trifecta"—they were caught committing three of
Culver Creek's expellable offenses at once. Lying naked
in bed together ("genitalcontact"
being offense #1), already drunk (#2), they were
smoking a joint (#3) when the Eagle burst in on them. Rumors had it that someone had ratted them out, and Takumi seemed intent on finding out who—intent
enough, anyway, to shout about it with his mouth jampacked with bufriedo.
"Paulwas an asshole,"the Colonelsaid. "I wouldn't have
ratted on them, butanyone who shacks up with aJaguardriving Weekday Warrior like Paul deserves what she
gets."
"Dude," Takumi responded, "yaw guhfwend," and then
heswallowed a bite offood, "isa WeekdayWarrior."
"True." The Colonel laughed. "Much to my chagrin, that
"True." The Colonel laughed. "Much to my chagrin, that
is an incontestable fact. But she is not as big an asshole
as Paul."
"Not quite."Takumismirked. The Colonel laughed again,
and I wondered why he wouldn't stand up for his
girlfriend. I wouldn't have cared if my girlfriend was a
Jaguar-driving Cyclops with a beard—I'd have been
gratefuljust to havesomeoneto make out with.
Thatevening, when the Colonel dropped byRoom43 to
pick up the cigarettes (he seemed to have forgotten that
theywere, technically, mine), I didn't really care when he
didn't invite me out with him. In public school, I'd known
plenty of people who made it a habit to hate this kind of
person or that kind—the geeks hated the preps, etc.—
and italways seemed like a bigwaste oftime to me. The Colonel didn't tellme where he'd spent the afternoon, or where he was going to spend the evening, but he closed
the door behind himwhen he left, so I guessed I wasn't welcome.
Justas well:I spent the night surfing the Web (no porn, I
swear) and reading The Final Days, a book about Richard Nixon and Watergate. For dinner, I microwaved
a refrigerated bufriedo the Colonel had snuck out of the
cafeteria. It reminded me of nights in Florida—
except with better food and no air-conditioning. Lying in
bed and reading felt pleasantly familiar.
I decided to heed what I'm sure would have been my mother's advice and get a good night's sleep before my
first day ofclasses. French II started at 8:10, and figuring
it couldn't take more than eight minutes to put on some
clothes and walk to the classrooms, I set my alarm for
8:02. I took a shower, and then lay in bed waiting for
sleep to save me fromthe heat. Around 11:00, I realized
that the tiny fan clipped to my bunk might make more of
that the tiny fan clipped to my bunk might make more of
a difference if I took offmy shirt, and I finally fellasleep
on top ofthesheets wearing just boxers.
A decision I found myself regretting some hours later when I awoke to two sweaty, meaty hands shaking the
holy hell out of me. I woke up completely and instantly,
sitting up straight in bed, terrified, and I couldn't
understand the voices for some reason, couldn't
understand why there were any voices at all, and what
the hell time was it anyway?And finallymy head cleared
enough to hear, "C'mon, kid. Don't make us kick your
ass. Just get up," and then from the top bunk, I heard,
"Christ, Pudge. Just get up." So I got up, and saw for
the first time three shadowy figures. Two of them
grabbed me, one with a hand on each ofmy upperarms,
and walked me out of the room. On the way out, the Colonel mumbled, "Have a good time. Go easy on him, Kevin."
They led me, almost at a jog, behind my dormbuilding,
and then across the soccer field. The ground was grassy
but gravelly, too,and I wondered why no one had shown
thecommon courtesy to tellmeto put on shoes, and why was I out there in my underwear, chicken legs exposed
to the world? Athousand humiliations crossed my mind:
There's the new junior, Miles Halter, handcuf ed to
the soccer goal wearing only his boxers. I imagined
themtaking me into the woods, where we now seemed
headed, and beating the shit out of me so that I looked
great for my first day of school. And the whole time, I
just stared at my feet, because I didn't want to look at
them and I didn't want to fall, so I watched my steps,
trying to avoid the bigger rocks. I felt the fight-or-fIight
reflex swell up inme overand overagain, but I knewthat
neither fight nor flight had ever worked for me before. They took me a roundabout way to the fake beach, and
then I knew what would happen—a good, old-fashioned
dunking in the lake—and I calmed down. I could handle
that.
When we reached the beach, they told me to put my
arms at my sides, and the beefiest guy grabbed two rolls
of duct tape fromthe sand. Withmy arms flatagainst my
sides like a soldier at attention, they mummified me from
my shoulder to my wrists. Then they threw me down on
the ground; the sand fromthe fake beach cushioned the
landing, but I still hit my head. Two of them pulled my
legs together while the other one—Kevin, I'd figured out —put his angular, strong-jawed face up so close to mine
that the gel-soaked spikes of hair pointing out from his
forehead poked at my face, and told me, "This is for the Colonel. You shouldn't hang out with that asshole." They
taped my legs together, from ankles to thighs. I looked
like a silver mummy. I said, "Please guys, don't," just
before they taped my mouth shut. Then they picked me
up and hurled meinto the water.
Sinking. Sinking, but instead of feeling panic or anything
else, I realized that "Please guys, don't"were terrible last words. But then the greatmiracle ofthe human species—
our buoyancy—came through, and as I felt myself
floating toward thesurface, I twisted and turned as best I
could so that the warm night air hit my nose first, and I
breathed. I wasn't dead and wasn't going to die.
Well, I thought, that wasn't so bad.
But there was still the small matter of getting to shore
before the sun rose. First, to determine my position visa-vis the shoreline. IfI tilted my head too much, I felt my whole body start to roll, and on thelong list of unpleasant ways to die, "facedown in soaking-wet white boxers" is
pretty high up there. So instead I rolled my eyes and
craned my neck back, my eyesalmost underwater, untilI
sawthat theshore—
sawthat theshore—
not ten feetaway—was directly behind my head. I began
to swim, an armless silver mermaid, using onlymy hips to
generate motion, until finally my ass scraped against the
lake's mucky bottom. I turned then and used my hipsand waist to roll three times, until I came ashore near a ratty
green towel. They'd leftmeatowel. Howthoughtful.
The water had seeped under the duct tape and loosened
theadhesive's grip onmy skin, but thetape was wrapped
around me three layers deep in places, which
necessitated wiggling like a fish out of water. Finally it
loosened enough for me to slip my left hand up and out
againstmy chestand rip thetape off.
I wrapped myself in the sandy towel. I didn't want to go
back to my roomand see Chip, because I had no idea what Kevin had meant—
maybe if I went back to the room, they'd be waiting for me and they'd get me for real; maybe I needed to show
them, "Okay. Got your message.
He's just my roommate, not my friend."And anyway, I
didn't feel terribly friendly toward the Colonel. Have a
good time, he'd said. Yeah, I thought. / had a ball.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 14 of 88
So I went to Alaska's room. I didn't know what time it was, but I could see a faint light underneath her door. I
knocked softly.
"Yeah," she said, and I came in, wet and sandy and wearing only a toweland soaking boxers. This was not,
obviously, how you want the world's hottest girl to see
obviously, how you want the world's hottest girl to see
you, but I figured she could explain to me what had just
happened.
She put down a book and got out of bed with a sheet wrapped around her shoulders. For a moment, she
looked concerned. She looked like the girl I met
yesterday, the girlwho said I wascute and bubbled over with energy and silliness and intelligence. And then she
laughed.
"Guess you went for a swim, huh?"And she said it with
such casual malice that I felt that everyone had known,
and I wondered why the whole damn school agreed in
advance to possibly drown Miles Halter. But Alaska
liked the Colonel, and in the confusion of the moment, I
just looked at her blankly, unsureeven ofwhat to ask.
"Give me a break," she said. "Come on. You know
what? There are people with real problems. I've got real
problems. Mommy ain't here, so buck up, big guy."
I left without saying a word to herand went to my room,
slamming the door behind me, waking the Colonel, and
stomping into the bathroom. I got in the shower to wash
the algae and the lake offme, but the ridiculous faucet of
a showerhead failed spectacularly, and how could Alaska and Kevin and those other guys already dislike me?After I finished theshower, I dried offand went into
theroomto find someclothes.
"So," he said. "What took you so long? Get lost on your way home?"
"They said it was because of you,"I said, and my voice
betrayed a hint ofannoyance. "They said I shouldn't hang
out with you."
"What? No, it happens to everybody,"the Colonelsaid.
"What? No, it happens to everybody,"the Colonelsaid.
"It happened to me. They throw you in the lake. You
swimout. Youwalk home."
"I couldn't just swimout,"I said softly, pulling on a pair
of jean shorts beneathmy towel. "They duct-taped me. I
couldn'tevenmove, really."
"Wait. Wait," he said, and hopped out of his bunk,
staring at me through the darkness. "They taped you? How?"And I showed him: I stood like a mummy, with my feet together and my hands at my sides, and showed
him how they'd wrapped me up. And then I plopped
down onto thecouch.
"Christ! You could have drowned! They'rejustsupposed
to throwyou in the water in your underwearand run!" he
shouted. "What the hellwere they thinking? Who was it? Kevin Richman and who else? Do you remember their
faces?"
"Yeah, I think."
"Why the hellwould they do that?"he wondered.
"Did you do something to them?"Iasked.
"No, but I'msureas shit gonna do something to 'emnow. We'll get them."
"It wasn'ta big deal. I got out fine."
"You could have died." And I could have, I suppose. But I didn't.
"Well, maybeI should just go to the Eagletomorrowand
tell him,"I said.
"Absolutely not," he answered. He walked over to his
crumpled shorts lying on the floor and pulled out a pack
crumpled shorts lying on the floor and pulled out a pack
ofcigarettes. Helit two and handed oneto me. I smoked
the whole goddamned thing.
"You're not," he continued, "because that's not how shit
gets dealt with here. And besides, you really don't want
to geta reputation for ratting. But we will dealwith those
bastards, Pudge. I promise you. Theywillregret messing with one ofmy friends."
And if the Colonel thought that calling me his friend would make mestand by him, well, he was right. "Alaska was kind of mean to me tonight," I said. I leaned over,
opened an empty desk drawer, and used it as a makeshiftashtray.
"LikeI said, she's moody."
I went to bed wearing a T-shirt, shorts, and socks. No matter howmiserably hot it got, I resolved, I would sleep
inmy clothesevery nightat the Creek, feeling—probably
for the first time in my life—the fear and excitement of
living in a place where you never know what's going to
happen or when.
one hundred twenty-six days before
"well,now it's war," the Colonel shouted the next morning. I rolled over and looked at the clock: 7:52. My
first Culver Creek class, French, started in eighteen minutes. I blinked a couple times and looked up at the Colonel, who was standing between the couch and the COFFEE
TABLE, holding his well-worn, once-white tennis shoes
by the laces. For a long time, he stared at me, and I
stared at him. And then, almost in slow motion, a grin
creptacross the Colonel's face.
"I've got to hand it to them," he said finally. "That was
pretty clever."
"What?"Iasked.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 15 of 88
"Last night—before they woke you up, I guess—they
pissed inmy shoes."
"Are you sure?"I said, trying not to laugh.
"Do you care to smell?" he asked, holding the shoes
toward me.
"Because I went ahead and smelled them, and yes, I am
sure. If there's one thing I know, it's when I've just
stepped in another man's piss. It's like my mom always
says: `Ya think you's a-walkin' on water, but turns out
you just got piss in your shoes.' Point those guys out to me if you see themtoday," he added, "because we need
to figure out why they're so, uh, pissed at me. And then we need to go ahead and start thinking about how we're
going to ruin their miserablelittlelives."
When I received the Culver Creek Handbook over the
summer and noticed happily that the "Dress Code"
section contained only two words,casual modesty, it
never occurred to me that girls would show up for class
half asleep in cotton pajama shorts, T-shirts, and flipflops. Modest, I guess,and casual.
And there was something about girls wearing pajamas
(even ifmodest), whichmight have made French at 8:10
in the morning bearable, if I'd had any idea what
in the morning bearable, if I'd had any idea what Madame O'Malley was talking about. Comment dis-tu
"OhmyGod, I don't knownearly enough French to pass
French II"en francais? My French I class back in
Florida did not prepare me for Madame O'Malley, who
skipped the "how was your summer" pleasantries and
dove directly into something called the passe compose, which is apparently a verb tense. Alaska sat directly
across fromme in the circle of desks, but she didn't look
at me once the entire class, even though I could notice
little but her. Maybeshecould be mean...but the way she
talked that first night about getting out of the labyrinth—
so smart. And the way her mouth curled up on the right
side all the time, like she was preparing to smirk, like
she'd mastered the right half of the Mona Lisa's
inimitablesmile...
From my room, the student population seemed manageable, but it overwhelmed me in the classroom
area, which was a single, long building just beyond the
dorm circle. The building was split into fourteen rooms
facing out toward the lake. Kids crammed the narrow
sidewalks in front of the classrooms, and even though
findingmy classes wasn't hard (even withmy poor sense
of direction, I could get from French in Room 3 to
precalc in Room 12), I felt unsettled all day. I didn't
knowanyoneand couldn'teven figure out whomI should
be trying to know, and the classes were hard, even on
the first day. My dad had told me I'd have to study, and
nowI believed him. Theteachers wereseriousand smart
and a lot of them went by "Dr.," and so when the time
came for my last class before lunch, World Religions, I
felt tremendous relief.AvestigefromwhenCulver Creek was a Christian boys' school, I figured the World Religionsclass, required ofevery juniorand senior, might
bean easyA.
It was my only class all day where the desks weren't
arranged either in a square or a circle, so, not wanting to
arranged either in a square or a circle, so, not wanting to
seemeager, I sat down in the third row at 11:03. I was
seven minutes early, partly because I liked to be
punctual, and partly becauseI didn't have anyone to chat with out in the halls. Shortly thereafter, the Colonelcame
in with Takumi, and they sat down on opposite sides of me.
"I heard about last night,"Takumisaid. "Alaska's pissed."
"That's weird, since she was such a bitch last night," I
blurted out.
Takumijustshook his head. "Yeah, well, she didn't know
the whole story. And people are moody, dude. You
gotta get used to living with people. You could have worsefriends than—"
The Colonelcut himoff. "Enoughwith the psychobabble, MC Dr. Phil. Let's talk counterinsurgency." People were
starting to file into class, so the Colonel leaned in toward me and whispered, "Ifany of 'emare in this class, let me
know, okay? Just, here, just put X's where they're
sitting," and he ripped a sheet of paper out of his
notebook and drew a square for each desk. As people
filed in, I saw one of them—the tall one with
immaculately spiky hair—Kevin. Kevin stared down the Colonel as he walked past, but in trying to stare, he
forgot to watch his step and bumped his thigh against a
desk. The Colonel laughed. One of the other guys, the
one who was either a little fat or worked out too much,
camein behind Kevin, sporting pleated khaki pantsand a
short-sleeve black polo shirt. As they sat down, I
crossed through theappropriatesquares on the Colonel's
diagram and handed it to him. Just then, the Old Man
shuffled in.
He breathed slowly and with great labor through his wide-openmouth. He took tiny steps toward the lectern,
wide-openmouth. He took tiny steps toward the lectern,
his heels not moving much past his toes. The Colonel
nudged me and pointed casually to his notebook, which
read, The Old Man only has one lung, and I did not
doubt it. His audible, almost desperate breaths reminded me ofmy grandfather when he was dying of lung cancer. Barrel-chested and ancient, the Old Man, it seemed to me, might die before heever reached the podium.
"My name," he said, "is Dr. Hyde. I have a first name, of
course. So far as you are concerned, it is Doctor. Your
parents pay a great deal ofmoney so that you can attend
school here, and I expect that you will offer themsome
return on their investment by reading what I tell you to
read when I tell you to read it and consistently attending
this class. And when you are here, youwill listen to what
I say."Clearly notan easyA.
"This year, we'll be studying three religious traditions:
Islam, Christianity, and Buddhism. We'll tackle three moretraditions next year.
And in my classes, I will talk most of the time, and you will listen most of the time. Because you may be smart,
but I've been smart longer. I'msure some of you do not
like lecture classes, but as you have probably noted, I'm
not as young as I used to be. I would love to spend my
remaining breath chatting with you about the finer points
of Islamic history, but our time together is short. I must
talk, and you must listen, for we are engaged here in the most important pursuit in history: the search for meaning. What is the nature of being a person? What is the best way to go about being a person? How did we come to
be, and what will become of us when we are no longer?
In short: What are the rules of this game, and how might we best play it?"
The nature of the labyrinth, I scribbled into my spiral
The nature of the labyrinth, I scribbled into my spiral
notebook, and the way out of it. This teacher rocked. I
hated discussion classes. I
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 16 of 88
hated talking, and I hated listening to everyone else
stumble on their words and try to phrase things in the
vaguest possible way so they wouldn't sound dumb, and
I hated how it was all just a game of trying to figure out what theteacher wanted to hearand then saying it. I'min
class, so teach me. And teach me he did: In those fifty minutes, the Old Man made me take religion seriously.
I'd never been religious, but he told us that religion is
important whether or not we believed in one, in the same way that historical events are important whether or not
you personally lived through them. And then he assigned
us fifty pages of reading for the next day—froma book
called Religious Studies.
That afternoon, I had two classes and two free periods. We had nine fifty-minute class periods each day, which means that most everyone had three "study periods"
(except for the Colonel, who had an extra independentstudy math class on account of being an Extra Special
Genius). The Coloneland I had biology together, whereI
pointed out the other guy who'd duct-taped me the night
before. In the top corner of his notebook, the Colonel wrote, Longwell Chase. Senior W-day Warrior. Friends w/Sara. Weird. It took me a minute to
remember who Sara was:the Colonel's girlfriend.
I spent my free periods in my roomtrying to read about
religion. I learned that myth doesn't mean a lie; it means
a traditional story that tells you something about people
and their worldview and what they hold sacred.
Interesting. I also learned that after the events of the
Interesting. I also learned that after the events of the
previous night, I was far too tired to care about myths or
anything else, so I slept on top of the covers for most of
the afternoon, until I awoke to Alaska singing, "WAKE UP, LITTLE PUHHHHHDGIE!"directly into my leftear
canal. I held the religion book close up against my chest
likeasmall paperback security blanket.
"That was terrible," I said. "What do I need to do to
ensurethat never happens to meagain?"
"Nothing you can do!" she said excitedly. "I'm
unpredictable. God, don't you hate Dr. Hyde? Don't
you? He's so condescending."
I sat up and said, "I think he's a genius," partly because I
thought it was true and partly because I just felt like
disagreeingwith her.
She sat down on the bed. "Do you always sleep in your
clothes?"
"Yup."
"Funny,"shesaid. "Youweren't wearingmuch last night."
I just glared at her.
"C'mon, Pudge. I'mteasing. You haveto betough here. I
didn't know how bad it was—and I'msorry, and they'll
regret it—but you have to be tough."And then she left. That was allshe had to say on the subject. She's cute, I
thought, but you don't need to like a girl who treats
you likeyou'reten: You've already got a mom.
one hundred twenty-two days before
after my last class ofmy first week at Culver Creek, I
entered Room43 to an unlikely sight: the diminutive and
shirtless Colonel, hunched over an ironing board,
shirtless Colonel, hunched over an ironing board,
attacking a pink button-down shirt. Sweat trickled down
his forehead and chest as he ironed with great
enthusiasm, his right arm pushing the iron across the
length oftheshirt with such vigor that his breathing nearly
duplicated Dr. Hyde's.
"I have a date," he explained. "This isan emergency."He
paused to catch his breath. "Do you know"—breath —"howto iron?"
I walked over to the pink shirt. It was wrinkled like an
old womanwho'd spent her youth sunbathing. If only the Colonel didn't ball up his every belonging and stuff it into
randomdresser drawers. "I think you just turn it on and
press it against the shirt, right?" I said. "I don't know. I
didn'teven knowwe had an iron."
"We don't. It's Takumi's. But Takumi doesn't know how
to iron, either. And when I asked Alaska, she started
yelling, `You're not going to impose the patriarchal
paradigm onme.' Oh, God, I need to smoke. I need to
smoke, but Ican't reek when I see Sara's parents. Okay,
screwit.
We're going to smoke in the bathroom with the shower
on. The shower has steam. Steam gets rid of wrinkles,
right?
"By the way," he said as I followed him into the
bathroom, "if you want to smoke inside during the day,
just turn on the shower. The smoke follows the steamup
the vents."
Though this made no scientific sense, it seemed to work. The shower's shortage of water pressure and low
showerhead made it all but useless for showering, but it worked greatasasmokescreen.
Sadly, it made a poor iron. The Colonel tried ironing the
Sadly, it made a poor iron. The Colonel tried ironing the
shirt once more ("I'mjust gonna push really hard and see
if that helps") and finally put it on wrinkled. He matched
the shirt with a blue tie decorated with horizontal lines of
little pink flamingos.
"The one thing my lousy father taught me," the Colonel
said as his hands nimbly threaded the tie into a perfect
knot, "was how to tie a tie. Which is odd, since I can't
imagine when heever had to wear one."
Just then, Sara knocked on the door. I'd seen her once
or twice before, but the Colonel never introduced me to
herand didn't haveachanceto that night.
"Oh. My God. Can't you at least press your shirt?" she
asked, even though the Colonel was standing in front of
theironing board.
"We're going out withmy parents." Sara looked awfully
nice in her blue summer dress. Her long, pale blond hair was pulled up into a twist, with a strand of hair falling
down each side of her face. Shelooked likea moviestar —a bitchy one.
"Look, I did my best. We don't all have maids to do our
ironing."
"Chip, that chip on your shoulder makes you look even
shorter."
"Christ,can't we get out the door without fighting?"
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 17 of 88
"I'm just saying. It's the opera. It's a big deal to my
"I'm just saying. It's the opera. It's a big deal to my
parents. Whatever. Let's go." I felt like leaving, but it
seemed stupid to hide in the bathroom, and Sara was
standing in the doorway, one hand cocked on her hip
and the other fiddlingwith her car keys as ifto say, Let's
go.
"I could wear a tuxedo and your parents would still hate me!"heshouted.
"That's not my fault! You antagonize them!" She held up
the car keys in front of him. "Look, we're going now or we're not going."
"Fuck it. I'mnot going anywhere with you,"the Colonel
said.
"Fine. Have a great night." Sara slammed the door so
hard that a sizable biography of Leo Tolstoy (last words:
"The truth is...I care a great deal...what they...") fell off my bookshelfand landed with a thud on our checkered
floor likean echo oftheslamming door.
"AHHHHH!!!!!!!!!!!"hescreamed.
"So that's Sara,"I said.
"Yes."
"Sheseems nice."
The Colonel laughed, knelt down next to the minifridge,
and pulled out a gallon of milk. He opened it, took a
swig, winced, halfcoughed, and sat down on the couch with the milk between his legs.
"Is itsour or something?"
"Oh, I should have mentioned that earlier. This isn't milk.
It's five parts milk and one part vodka. I call itambrosia.
It's five parts milk and one part vodka. I call itambrosia. Drink ofthe gods.
You can barely smell the vodka in the milk, so the Eagle
can't catch me unless he actually takes a sip. The
downside is that it tastes like sour milk and rubbing
alcohol, but it's Friday night, Pudge, and my girlfriend isa
bitch. Wantsome?"
"I think I'll pass."Asidefromafewsips ofchampagne on New Year's under the watchful eye of my parents, I'd
never really drunk any alcohol, and "ambrosia" didn't
seemlike the drink with which to start. Outside, I heard
the pay phone ring. Given the fact that 190 boarders
shared five pay phones, I was amazed at how
infrequently it rang. We weren't supposed to have cell
phones, but I'd noticed that some of the Weekday Warriors carried them surreptitiously. And most non- Warriorscalled their parents, as I did, on aregular basis,
so parents only called when their kids forgot.
"Are you going to get that?" the Colonel asked me. I
didn't feel like being bossed around by him, but I also
didn't feellikefighting.
Through a buggy twilight, I walked to the pay phone, which was drilled into the wall between Rooms 44 and
45. On both sides of the phone, dozens of phone
numbers and esoteric notes were written in pen and mar k er (205.555.1584; Tommy to airport
4:20;773.573.6521;JG—
Kuf s?). Calling the pay phone required a great deal of
patience. I picked up on about the ninth ring.
"Can you get Chip for me?" Sara asked. It sounded like
she was on acell phone.
"Yeah, hold on."
"Yeah, hold on."
I turned, and he was already behind me, as if he knew it would be her. I handed him the receiver and walked
back to theroom.
Aminute later, three words made their way to our room
through the thick, still air of Alabama at almost-night.
"Screwyou too!"the Colonelshouted.
Back in the room, he sat down with his ambrosia and
told me, "She says I ratted out Paul and Marya. That's what the Warriors are saying. That I ratted them out. Me. That's why the piss in the shoes. That's why the
nearly killing you. 'Cause you live with me, and they say
I'marat."
I tried to remember who Paul and Marya were. The
names were familiar, but I had heard so many names in
the last week, and I couldn't match "Paul"and "Marya" with faces. And then I remembered why: I'd never seen
them. They got kicked out the year before, having
committed the Trifecta.
"Howlong have you been dating her?"Iasked.
"Nine months. We never got along. I mean, I didn't even
briefly like her. Like, my mom and my dad—my dad would get pissed, and then he would beat the shit out of mymom. And thenmy dad would be all nice, and they'd
have like a honeymoon period. But with Sara, there's
never a honeymoon period. God, how could she think I wasarat?I know, I know:Why don't we break up?"He
ran a hand through his hair, clutching afistful ofitatop his
head, and said, "I guess I staywith her becauseshestays with me. And that's not an easy thing to do. I'm a bad
boyfriend. She's a bad girlfriend. We deserve each
other."
"But-"
"I can't believe they think that," he said as he walked to
the bookshelf and pulled down the almanac. He took a
long pull off his ambrosia. "Goddamn Weekday Warriors. It was probably one of them that ratted out
Paul and Marya and then blamed me to cover their
tracks.
Anyway, it's a good night for staying in. Staying in with
Pudgeand ambrosia."
"I still—" I said, wanting to say that I didn't understand
how you could kiss someone who believed you were a
rat if being a rat was the worst thing in the world, but the Colonelcutme off.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 18 of 88
"Not another word about it. You know what the capital
ofSierra Leoneis?"
"No."
"Me neither," he said, "but I intend to find out."And with
that, he stuck his nose in the almanac, and the
conversationwas over.
one hundred ten days before
keeping up with my classes proved easier than I'd
expected. My general predisposition to spending a lot of
time inside reading gave me a distinctadvantage over the
average Culver Creek student. By the third week of
classes, plenty of kids had been sunburned to a bufriedolike golden brown fromdays spentchatting outside in the
like golden brown fromdays spentchatting outside in the
shadeless dorm circle during free periods. But I was
barely pink:I studied.
And I listened in class, too, but on that Wednesday morning, when Dr. Hyde started talking about how
Buddhists believe that all things are interconnected, I
found myselfstaring out the window. I was looking at the wooded, slow-sloping hill beyond the lake. And from
Hyde's classroom, things did seemconnected: The trees
seemed to clothe the hill, and just as I would never think
to notice a particular cotton thread in the magnificently
tight orange tank top Alaska wore that day, I couldn't
see the trees for the forest—everything so intricately woven together that it made no senseto think of onetree
as independent fromthat hill. And then I heard my name,
and I knewI was in trouble.
"Mr. Halter,"the Old Man said. "Here Iam, strainingmy
lungs for your edification. And yet something out there
seems to have caught your fancy in a way that I've been
unable to do. Pray tell: What have you discovered out
there?"
Now I felt my own breath shorten, the whole class watching me, thanking God theyweren't me. Dr. Hyde
had already done this three times, kicking kids out of
class for not paying attention or writing notes to one
another.
"Urn, I was just looking outside at the, uh, at the hilland
thinking about, um, thetreesand theforest, like youwere
saying earlier,about the way—"
The Old Man, who obviously did not tolerate vocalized
rambling, cut me off. "I'mgoing to ask you to leaveclass, Mr. Halter, so that you can go out thereand discover the
relationship between the um-treesand the uh-forest.And
tomorrow, when you'reready to takethisclass seriously,
tomorrow, when you'reready to takethisclass seriously,
I willwelcome you back."
I sat still, my pen resting inmy hand, my notebook open, my face flushed and my jaw jutting out into an underbite,
an old trick I had to keep from looking sad or scared. Two rows behind me, I heard a chair move and turned
around to see Alaska standing up, slinging her backpack
over onearm.
"I'msorry, but that's bullshit. You can't just throwhimout
of class. You drone on and on for an hour every day,
and we're notallowed to glance out the window?"
The Old Man stared back at Alaska like a bull at a matador, then raised a hand to his sagging face and
slowly rubbed the white stubble on his cheek. "For fifty minutes a day, five days a week, you abide by my rules. Or you fail. Thechoiceis yours. Both of you leave."
I stuffed my notebook into my backpack and walked
out, humiliated. As the door shut behind me, I felt a tap
onmy left shoulder. I turned, but there was no onethere. Then I turned the other way, and Alaska was smiling at me, the skin between hereyesand temple crinkled into a
starburst. "The oldest trick in the book," she said, "but
everybody falls for it."
I tried a smile, but I couldn't stop thinking about Dr. Hyde. It was worse than the Duct Tape Incident,
because I always knew that the Kevin Richmans of the world didn't like me. But my teachers had always been
card-carryingmembers ofthe Miles Halter FanClub.
"I told you he wasan asshole,"shesaid.
"I stillthink he'sa genius. He's right. I wasn't listening."
"Right, but he didn't need to be a jerk about it. Like he
"Right, but he didn't need to be a jerk about it. Like he
needs to prove his power by humiliating you?!Anyway,"
she said, "the only real geniuses are artists: Yeats,
Picasso, Garcia Marquez: geniuses. Dr. Hyde: bitter old man."
And then sheannounced we were going to look for fourleaf clovers until class ended and we could go smoke with the Colonel and Takumi, "both of whom," she
added, "are big-time assholes for not marching out of
class right behind us."
WhenAlaska Young is sitting with her legs crossed in a
brittle, periodically green clover patch leaning forward in
search of four-leaf clovers, the pale skin of her sizable
cleavage clearly visible, it is a plain fact of human
physiology that it becomes impossible to join in her
clover search. I'd gotten in enough trouble already for
lookingwhereI wasn'tsupposed to, butstill...
After perhaps two minutes of combing through a clover
patch with her long, dirty fingernails, Alaska grabbed a
clover with three full-size petals and an undersize, runt of
a fourth, then looked up at me, barely giving me time to
avertmy eyes.
"Even though you were dearly not doing your part in the
clover search, perv,"she said wryly, "I really would give
you thisclover.
Except luck is for suckers." She pinched the runt petal
between the nails of her thumb and finger and plucked it.
"There,"shesaid to thecloveras she dropped it onto the
ground. "Nowyou're nota geneticfreak anymore."
"Uh, thanks," I said. The bell rang, and Takumiand the Colonelwerefirst out the door. Alaskastared at them.
"What?"asked the Colonel. But she just rolled her eyes
"What?"asked the Colonel. But she just rolled her eyes
and started walking. We followed in silence through the
dormcircle and then across the soccer field. We ducked
into the woods, following the faint path around the lake
until we came to a dirt road. The Colonel ran up to Alaska, and they started fighting about something quietly
enough that I couldn't hear the words so much as the mutualannoyance, and I finally asked Takumi where we were headed.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 19 of 88
"This road dead-ends into the barn," he said. "So maybe
there. But probably thesmoking hole. You'llsee."
From here, the woods were a totally different creature
than from Dr. Hyde's classroom. The ground was thick with fallen branches, decaying pine needles, and brambly
green bushes; the path wound past pine trees sprouting
tall and thin, their stubbly needles providing a lace of
shade fromanother sunburned day. And the smaller oak
and maple trees, which from Dr. Hyde's classroom had
been invisible beneath the more majestic pines, showed
hints ofan as-yet-thermally-unforeseeable fall: Their stillgreen leaves were beginning to droop.
We came to a rickety wooden bridge—just thick
plywood laid over a concrete foundation—over Culver Creek, the winding rivulet that doubled back over and
over again through the outskirts of campus. On the far
side of the bridge, there was a tiny path leading down a
steep slope. Noteven a path so much asa series of hints —a broken branch here,a patch ofstomped-down grass
there—that people had come this way before. As we walked down single file, Alaska, the Colonel, and Takumi each held back a thick maple branch for one
Takumi each held back a thick maple branch for one
another, passing it along until I, last in line, let it snap
back into place behind me. And there, beneath the
bridge, an oasis. Aslab ofconcrete, three feet wide and
ten feet long, with blue plasticchairs stolen long ago from
some classroom. Cooled by the creek and the shade of
the bridge, I felt unhot for thefirst timeinweeks.
The Colonel dispensed the cigarettes. Takumi passed;
therest of us lit up.
"He has no right to condescend to us is all I'm saying," Alaska said, continuing her conversation with the Colonel. "Pudgeis done with staring out the window,and
I'mdone with going on tiradesabout it, but he'saterrible
teacher,and youwon'tconvince me otherwise."
"Fine,"the Colonelsaid. "Just don't make another scene. Christ, you nearly killed the poor old bastard."
"Seriously, you'll never win by crossing Hyde," Takumi
said.
"He'll eat you alive, shit you out, and then piss on his
dump. Which by the way is what we should be doing to whoever ratted onMarya. Hasanyone heard anything?"
"It must have been some Weekday Warrior," Alaska
said. "But apparently they think it was the Colonel. So who knows. Maybe the Eagle just got lucky. She was
stupid; she got caught; she got expelled; it's over. That's what happens when you'restupid and you getcaught."
Alaska made anO with her lips, moving her mouth like a
goldfish eating, trying unsuccessfully to blowsmokerings.
"Wow," Takumi said, "if I ever get kicked out, remind me to even the score myself, since I sure can't count on
you."
you."
"Don't be ridiculous,"she responded, not angry so much
as dismissive. "I don't understand why you're so
obsessed with figuring out everything that happens here,
like we have to unravel every mystery. God, it's over. Takumi, you gotta stop stealing other people's problems
and get some of your own."Takumistarted up again, but Alaska raised her hand as if to swat the conversation
away.
I said nothing—I hadn't known Marya, and anyway,
"listening quietly"was my generalsocialstrategy.
"Anyway," Alaska said to me. "I thought the way he
treated youwas justawful. I wanted to cry. I just wanted
to kiss you and makeit better."
"Shame you didn't,"I deadpanned,and they laughed.
"You're adorable,"she said, and I felt the intensity of her
eyes onme and looked away nervously. "Too bad I love my boyfriend."I stared at the knotted roots of the trees
on the creek bank, trying hard not to look like I'd just
been called adorable.
Takumicouldn't believe it either, and he walked over to me, tusslingmy hair with his hand, and started rapping to Alaska. "Yeah, Pudge is adorable / but you want
incorrigible / so Jake is more endurable / 'cause he's so —damn. Damn. Ialmost had four rhymes on adorable.
ButallIcould think ofwas unfloorable, which isn'teven
a word."
Alaska laughed. "That made me not be mad at you
anymore. God, rapping is sexy. Pudge, did you even
know that you're in the presence of the sickest emcee in Alabama?"
"Urn, no."
"Drop a beat, Colonel Catastrophe," Takumisaid, and I
laughed at the idea that a guy as short and dorky as the Colonelcould have a rap name. The Colonelcupped his
handsaround his mouth and started making some absurd
noises that I suppose wereintended to be beats.
Puh-chi. Puh-puhpuh-chi. Takumilaughed.
"Right here, by theriver, youwant meto kick it?/ If your
smoke was a Popsicle, I'd surely lick it / My rhymin' is
old school, sort of like the ancient Romans / The Colonel's beats is sad like Arthur Miller's Willy Loman /
Sometimes I'maccused of being ashowman /
ICanRhymeFastand Ican rhymeslow, man."
He paused, took a breath,and then finished.
"Like Emily Dickinson, I ain't afraid ofslant rhyme /And
that's theend ofthis verse;emcee's out on a high."
I didn't know slant rhyme fromregular rhyme, but I was
suitably impressed. We gave Takumi a soft round of
applause. Alaska finished her cigarette and flicked it into
theriver.
"Why do you smokeso damn fast?"Iasked.
She looked at me and smiled widely, and such a wide
smile on her narrow face might have looked goofy were
it not for the unimpeachably elegant green in her eyes.
She smiled with all the delight of a kid on Christmas morning and said, "Y'all smoke to enjoy it. I smoke to
die."
one hundred nine days before
one hundred nine days before
dinnerIN THE CAFETERIA the next night was meat
loaf, one of the rare dishes that didn't arrive deep-fried,
and, perhaps as a result, meat loaf was Maureen's
greatest failure—a stringy, gravy-soaked concoction that
did not much resemble a loafand did not much taste like meat.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 20 of 88
Although I'd never ridden in it, Alaska apparently had a
car, and she offered to drive the Colonel and me to McDonald's, but the Colonel didn't haveanymoney, and
I didn't have much either, what with constantly paying for
hisextravagantcigarette habit.
So instead the Colonel and I reheated two-day-old
bufriedos—unlike, say, french fries, a microwaved
bufriedo lost nothing of its taste or its satisfying crunch—
after which the Colonel insisted on attending the Creek's
first basketball game oftheseason.
"Basketball in the fall?" I asked the Colonel. "I don't
know much about sports, but isn't that when you play
football?"
"The schools in our league are too small to have football
teams, so we play basketball in the fall. Although, man,
the Culver Creek football team would be a thing of
beauty. Your scrawny ass could probably start at
lineman. Anyway, the basketball gamesare great."
I hated sports. I hated sports, and I hated people who
played them, and I hated people who watched them, and
I hated people who didn't hate people who watched or
played them. In third grade—the very last year that one
could play T-ball—my mother wanted me to make
friends, so she forced me onto the Orlando Pirates. I made friends all right—with a bunch of kindergartners, which didn't really bolster my social standing with my
peers. Primarily because I towered over the rest of the
players, I nearlymadeit onto the T-ballall-star teamthat
year. The kid who beat me, Clay Wurtzel, had one arm.
I was an unusually tall third grader with two arms, and I
got beat out by kindergartner ClayWurtzel.
And it wasn't some pity-the-one-armed-kid thing, either. Clay Wurtzel could flat-out hit, whereas I sometimes
struck outevenwith the ballsitting on thetee. One ofthe
things thatappealed to me mostabout Culver Creek was
thatmy dad assured methere was no PE requirement.
"There is only one time when I put aside my passionate
hatred for the Weekday Warriors and their country-club
bullshit," the Colonel told me. "And that's when they
pump up the air-conditioning in the gym for a little oldfashioned Culver Creek basketball. You can't miss the
first game ofthe year."
As we walked toward the airplane hangar of a gym, which I had seen but nevereven thought to approach, the Colonelexplained to me the most important thing about
our basketballteam:Theywere not very good. The"star"
of the team, the Colonelsaid, was a senior named Hank Walsten, who played power forward despite being fivefoot-eight. Hank's primary claim to campus fame, I
already knew, was that he always had weed, and the Colonel told me that for four years, Hank started every
game withoutever once playing sober.
"He loves weed likeAlaska loves sex,"the Colonelsaid.
"This is a man who once constructed a bong using only
the barrel ofan air rifle, a ripe pear, and an eight-by-ten
the barrel ofan air rifle, a ripe pear, and an eight-by-ten
glossy photograph of Anna Kournikova. Not the
brightest gem in the jewelry shop, but you've got to
admire his single-minded dedication to drug abuse."
From Hank, the Colonel told me, it went downhill until
you reached Wilson Carbod, the starting center, who wasalmostsix feet tall.
"We're so bad,"the Colonelsaid, "we don't even have a mascot. Icall us the Culver Creek Nothings."
"So they justsuck?"Iasked. I didn't quite understand the
point ofwatching your terribleteamget walloped, though
theair-conditioningwas reason enough for me.
"Oh, they suck," the Colonel replied. "But we always
beat the shit out of the deaf-and-blind school." Apparently, basketball wasn't a big priority at the Alabama School for the Deaf and Blind, and so we
usually came out oftheseasonwith asingle victory.
When we arrived, the gymwas packed with most every Culver Creek student—I noticed, for instance, the Creek's three goth girls reapplying their eyeliner as they
sat on the top row of the gym's bleachers. I'd never
attended a school basketball game back home, but I
doubted the crowds there were quite so inclusive. Even
so, I was surprised when none other thanKevinRichman
sat down on the bleacher directly in front ofme while the
opposing school's cheerleading team (their unfortunate
school colors were mud-brown and dehydrated-pissyellow) tried to fire up the small visitors' section in the
crowd. Kevin turned around and stared at the Colonel.
Like most of the other guy Warriors, Kevin dressed
preppy, looking likealawyer-who-enjoys-golfingwaiting
to happen. And his hair, a blond mop, short on the sides
and spiky on top, was always soaked through with so
and spiky on top, was always soaked through with so much gell that it looked perennially wet. I didn't hate him
like the Colonel did, of course, because the Colonel
hated himon principle, and principled hate is a hell ofa
lot stronger than "Boy, I wish you hadn't mummified me
and thrownme into the lake" hate. Still, I tried to stare at
himintimidatingly as he looked at the Colonel, but it was
hard to forget that this guy had seen my skinny ass in
nothing but boxersacouple weeksago.
"You ratted out Paul and Marya. We got you back. Truce?"Kevin asked.
"I didn't rat them out. Pudge herecertainly didn't rat
them out, but you brought him in on your fun. Truce? Hmm, letmetakea pollreal quick."Thecheerleaders sat
down, holding their pompoms close to their chest as if
praying. "Hey, Pudge," the Colonel said. "What do you
think ofatruce?"
"It reminds me of when the Germans demanded that the U.S. surrenderat the Battle ofthe Bulge,"I said. "I guess
I'd say to this truce offer what GeneralMcAuliffe said to
that one:Nuts."
"Why would you try to kill this guy, Kevin? He's a
genius. Nuts to your truce."
"Come on, dude. I know you ratted them out, and we
had to defend our friend, and now it's over. Let's end it." He seemed very sincere, perhaps due to the Colonel's
reputation for pranking.
"I'll make you a deal. You pick one dead American
president. If Pudge doesn't know that guy's last words,
truce. If he does, you spend therest of your lifelamenting
the day you pissed inmy shoes."
"That's retarded."
"That's retarded."
"Allright, no truce,"the Colonelshot back.
"Fine. Millard Fillmore,"Kevin said. The Colonel looked
at me hurriedly, his eyes saying, Was that guy a
president? I justsmiled.
"When Fillmore was dying, he was super hungry. But his
doctor was trying to starve his fever or whatever.
Fillmore wouldn't shut up
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 21 of 88
about wanting to eat, though, so finally the doctor gave
him a tiny teaspoon of soup. And all sarcastic, Fillmore
said, 'The nourishment is palatable,' and then died. No
truce."
Kevin rolled his eyes and walked away, and it occurred
to me that I could have made up any last words for Millard Fillmore and Kevin probably would have
believed me if I'd used that same tone of voice, the Colonel'sconfidencerubbing off onme.
"That was your first badass moment!" The Colonel
laughed.
"Now, it's true that I gave you an easy target. But still. Well done."
Unfortunately for the Culver Creek Nothings, we weren't
playing the deaf-and-blind school. We were playing
some Christian school from downtown Birmingham, a
team stocked with huge, gargantuan apemen with thick
beardsand astrong distastefor turning the othercheek.
At theend ofthefirst quarter: 20-4.
At theend ofthefirst quarter: 20-4.
And that's when the fun started. The Colonel led all of
thecheers.
"Cornbread!"hescreamed.
"CHICKEN!"thecrowd responded.
"Rice!"
"PEAS!"
And then,alltogether:"WEGOTHIGHERSATs."
"Hip Hip Hip Hooray!"the Colonelcried.
"YOU'LLBEWORKIN' FORUS SOMEDAY!"
The opposing team's cheerleaders tried to answer our
cheers with "Theroof, theroof, theroofis on fire! Hell is
in your future if you give in to desire," but we could
always do themone better.
"Buy!"
"SELL!"
"Trade!"
"BARTER!"
"YOU'RE MUCH BIGGER, BUT WE ARE
SMARTER!"
When the visitors shootafreethrowonmostevery court
in the country, the fans make a lot of noise, screaming
and stomping their feet. It doesn't work, because players
learn to tune out white noise. At Culver Creek, we had a much better strategy. At first, everyone yelled and
much better strategy. At first, everyone yelled and
screamed likein a normal game. But then everyonesaid,
"Shh!" and there was absolute silence. Just as our hated
opponent stopped dribbling and prepared for his shot,
the Colonelstood up and screamed something. Like:
"For thelove ofGod, pleaseshave your back hair!"Or:
"I need to be saved. Can you minister to me after your
shot?!"
Toward the end of the third quarter, the Christian-school
coach called a time-out and complained to the refabout
the Colonel, pointing at himangrily. We were down 56-
13. The Colonelstood up. "What?!You have a problem
withme!?"
Thecoach screamed, "You're botheringmy players!"
"THAT'S THE POINT, SHERLOCK!" the Colonel
screamed back. The ref came over and kicked him out
ofthe gym. I followed him.
"I've gotten thrown out ofthirty-seven straight games," he
said.
"Damn."
"Yeah. Once or twice, I've had to go really crazy. I ran
onto thecourt with eleven seconds left onceand stolethe
ballfromthe other team. It wasn't pretty. But, you know.
I haveastreak to maintain."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 22 of 88
The Colonel ran ahead ofme, gleefulat his ejection, and
The Colonel ran ahead ofme, gleefulat his ejection, and
I jogged after him, trailing in his wake. I wanted to be
one of those people who have streaks to maintain, who
scorch the ground with their intensity. But for now, at
least I knew such people, and they needed me, just like
comets need tails.
one hundred eight days before
the next day, Dr. Hyde asked me to stay after class.
Standing before him, I realized for the first time how
hunched his shoulders were, and he seemed suddenly
sad and kind of old. "You like this class, don't you?" he
asked.
"Yessir."
"You've got a lifetime to mull over the Buddhist
understanding of interconnectedness." He spoke every
sentence as if he'd written it down, memorized it, and was now reciting it. "But while you were looking out the window, you missed the chance to explore the equally
interestingBuddhist beliefin being present forevery facet
of your daily life, of being truly present. Be present in this
class. And then, when it's over, be present out there," he
said, nodding toward thelakeand beyond.
"Yessir."
one hundred one days before
on the first morning of October, I knew something was wrong as soon as I woke up enough to turn offthe alarm
clock. The bed didn'tsmellright. And I didn't feelright. It
took me a groggy minute before I realized: I feltcold. Well, at the very least, the small fan clipped to my bunk
seemed suddenly unnecessary. "It'scold!"I shouted.
"OhGod, what timeis it?"I heard above me.
"Eight-oh-four,"I said.
The Colonel, who didn't have an alarmclock but almost
always woke up to take a shower before mine went off,
swung his short legs over the side of the bed, jumped
down,and dashed to his dresser.
"I suppose I missed my window of opportunity to
shower,"hesaid as he put on a greenCULVERCREEK
BASKETBALL T-shirt and a pair of shorts. "Oh well. There'salways tomorrow. And it's notcold. It's probably
eighty."
Grateful to have slept fully dressed, I just put on shoes,
and the Colonel and I jogged to the classrooms. I slid
into my seat with twenty seconds to spare. Halfway
through class, Madame O'Malley turned around to write
something in French on the blackboard, and Alaska
passed mea note.
Nice bedhead. Study at McDonald's for lunch?
Our first significant precalctest was only two daysaway,
so Alaska grabbed the six precalc kids she did not
consider Weekday Warriors and piled us into her tiny
bluetwo-door. By happy coincidence,acutesophomore
named Lara ended up sitting on my lap. Lara'd been
born in Russia or someplace, and she spoke with a slight
accent. Since we were only four layers of clothes from
doing it, I took the opportunity to introduce myself.
"I know who you are." She smiled. "You're Alaska's
freend fromFlowReeda."
"Yup. Get ready for a lot of dumb questions, 'cause I
suck at precalc,"I said.
She started to answer, but then she was thrown back
She started to answer, but then she was thrown back
againstmeas Alaskashot out ofthe parking lot.
"Kids, meet Blue Citrus. So named because she is a
lemon,"Alaska said. "Blue Citrus, meet the kids. If you
can find them, you might want to fasten your seat belts.
Pudge, you might want to serve as a seat belt for Lara." What the car lacked in speed, Alaska made up for by
refusing to move her foot fromthe accelerator, damn the
consequences. Before weeven got offcampus, Lara was
lurching helplesslywheneverAlaskatook hard turns, so I
took Alaska's advice and wrapped my arms around Lara's waist.
"Thanks,"shesaid,almost inaudibly.
After a fast if reckless three miles to McDonald's, we
ordered seven large french fries to share and then went
outsideand sat on thelawn. Wesat in acirclearound the
trays offries, andAlaska taughtclass, smokingwhile she
ate.
Likeany good teacher, shetolerated little dissension. She
smoked and talked and ate for an hour without stopping,
and I scribbled in my notebook as the muddy waters of
tangents and cosines began to clarify. But not everyone was so fortunate.
As Alaska zipped through something obvious about
linear equations, stoner/baller Hank Walsten said, "Wait, wait. I don't get it."
"That's because you haveeight functioning brain cells."
"Studies show that marijuana is better for your health
than thosecigarettes,"Hank said.
Alaska swallowed a mouthful offrench fries, took a drag
on her cigarette, and blew smoke across the table at
on her cigarette, and blew smoke across the table at Hank. "I may die young,"
she said. "But at least I'll die smart. Now, back to
tangents."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 23 of 88
one hundred days before
"not to ask the obvious question, but whyAlaska?" I
asked. I'd just gotten my precalc test back, and I was
awash with admiration for Alaska, since her tutoring had
paved myway to a B-plus. Sheand I satalonein the TV
lounge watching MTV on a drearily cloudy Saturday.
Furnished with couches left behind by previous
generations of Culver Creek students, the TV roomhad
the musty air of dust and mildew—and, perhaps for that
reason, was almost perennially unoccupied. Alaska took
asip ofMountainDewand grabbed my hand in hers.
"Always comes up eventually. All right, so my momwas
something of a hippie when I was a kid. You know, wore oversize sweaters she knitted herself, smoked a lot
of pot, et cetera. And my dad was a real Republican
type, and so when I was born, mymomwanted to name me Harmony Springs Young, and my dad wanted to
name me Mary Frances Young." As she talked, she
bobbed her head back and forth to the MTV music,
even though the song was the kind of manufactured pop
ballad she professed to hate.
"So instead of naming me Harmony or Mary, they
agreed to let me decide. So when I was little, they called me Mary. I mean, they called me sweetie or whatever,
but like on school forms and stuff, they wrote Mary
Young. And then on my seventh birthday, my present
Young. And then on my seventh birthday, my present was that I got to pick my name. Cool, huh? So I spent
the whole day looking at my dad's globe fora really cool
name. And so my firstchoice was Chad, like the country
inAfrica. But then my dad said that was a boy's name,
so I picked Alaska."
I wish my parents had let me pick my name. But they went ahead and picked the only name firstborn male Halters have had for a century. "But why Alaska?" I
asked her.
Shesmiled with theright side of her mouth. "Well, later, I
found out what it means. It's from an Aleut word, Alyeska. It means 'that which the sea breaks against,'
and I love that. But at the time, I just saw Alaska up
there. And it was big, just likeI wanted to be. And it was
damn far away from Vine Station, Alabama, just like I wanted to be."
I laughed. "And now you're all grown up and fairly far
away from home," I said, smiling. "So congratulations."
She stopped the head bobbing and let go of my
(unfortunately sweaty) hand.
"Getting out isn't that easy," she said seriously, her eyes
on mine like I knew the way out and wouldn't tell her. And then she seemed to switch conversational horses in midstream. "Like after college, know what I want to do? Teach disabled kids. I'ma good teacher, right? Shit, if I
can teach you precalc, Ican teach anybody. Like maybe
kids with autism."
She talked softly and thoughtfully, like she was tellingme
a secret, and I leaned in toward her, suddenly
overwhelmed with the feeling that we must kiss, that we
ought to kiss right nowon the dusty orangecouchwith its
cigarette burns and its decades of collected dust. And I
cigarette burns and its decades of collected dust. And I would have:I would have kept leaning toward her until it
became necessary to tilt my face so as to miss her skislope nose, and I would have felt the shock of her sosoft lips. I would have. But then shesnapped out ofit.
"No,"shesaid, and Icouldn't tellat first whether she was
reading my kiss-obsessed mind or responding to herself
out loud. Sheturned away fromme, and softly, maybeto
herself, said, "Jesus, I'm not going to be one of those
people who sits around talking about what they're gonna
do. I'mjust going to do it. Imagining the future is a kind
of nostalgia."
"Huh?"Iasked.
"You spend your wholelifestuck in thelabyrinth, thinking
about how you'llescape it one day, and how awesome it will be, and imagining that future keeps you going, but
you never do it. You just use the future to escape the
present."
I guess that made sense. I had imagined that life at the Creek would be a bit more exciting than it was—in
reality, there'd been more homework than adventure—
but if I hadn't imagined it, I would never have gotten to
the Creek atall.
She turned back to the TV, a commercialfor a car now,
and made a joke about Blue Citrus needing its own car
commercial. Mimicking the deep-voiced passion of
commercial voice-overs, she said, "It's small, it's slow,
and it's shitty, but it runs. Sometimes. Blue Citrus: See Your Local Used-Car Dealer." But I wanted to talk moreabout herand Vine Station and thefuture.
"Sometimes I don't get you,"I said.
She didn't even glance at me. She just smiled toward the
television and said, "You never get me. That's the whole
television and said, "You never get me. That's the whole
point."
ninety-nine days before
I SPENTMOST ofthe next day lying in bed, immersed
in the miserably uninteresting fictional world ofEthan Frome, while the Colonel sat at his desk, unraveling the
secrets of differential equations or something. Although we tried to ration our smoke breaks amid the shower's
steam, weran out ofcigarettes before dark, necessitating
a trip to Alaska's room. She lay on the floor, holding a
book over her head.
"Let's go smoke,"hesaid.
"You're out ofcigarettes, aren't you?"she asked without
looking up.
"Well. Yes."
"Got five bucks?"sheasked.
"Nope."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 24 of 88
"Pudge?"sheasked.
"Yeah, all right." I fished a five out of my pocket, and Alaska handed me a pack of twenty Marlboro Lights. I
knew I'd smoke maybe five of them, but so long as I
subsidized the Colonel's smoking, he couldn't really
attack mefor being another rich kid,a WeekdayWarrior who just didn't happen to liveinBirmingham.
We grabbed Takumi and walked down to the lake,
We grabbed Takumi and walked down to the lake,
hiding behind a few trees, laughing. The Colonel blew
smokerings, and Takumicalled them"pretentious,"while Alaska followed the smoke rings with her fingers,
stabbing at themlikea kid trying to pop bubbles.
And thenwe heard a branch break. It might have been a
deer, but the Colonel busted out anyway. A voice
directly behind us said,
"Don't run, Chipper," and the Colonel stopped, turned
around,and returned to us sheepishly.
The Eagle walked toward us slowly, his lips pursed in
disgust. He wore a white shirt and a black tie, like
always. He gaveeach of us in turn the Look ofDoom.
"Y'all smell like a North Carolina tobacco field in a wildfire,"hesaid.
We stood silent. I felt disproportionately terrible, like I
had just been caught fleeing the scene of a murder. Would hecallmy parents?
"I'llsee you in Jury tomorrowat five," heannounced, and
then walked away. Alaska crouched down, picked up
the cigarette she had thrown away, and started smoking
again. The Eagle wheeled around, his sixth sense
detecting Insubordination To Authority Figures. Alaska
dropped the cigarette and stepped on it. The Eagle
shook his head, and even though he must have been
crazymad, I swear to God hesmiled.
"Heloves me,"Alaskatold meas we walked back to the
dorm circle. "He loves allly'all, too. He just loves the
school more. That's the thing. He thinks busting us is
good for the school and good for us. It's the eternal
struggle, Pudge. The Good versus the Naughty."
"You're awfully philosophical for a girl that just got
busted,"I told her.
"Sometimes you lose a battle. But mischief always wins
the war."
ninety-eight days before
one of the unique things about Culver Creek was the
Jury. Every semester, the faculty elected twelve students,
three from each class, to serve on the Jury. The Jury meted out punishment for nonexpellable offenses, for
everything from staying out past curfew to smoking. Usually, it was smoking or being in a girl's room after
seven. So youwent to theJury, youmade yourcase,and
they punished you. The Eagleserved as thejudge,and he
had the right to overturn the Jury's verdict (just like in the
realAmerican courtsystem), but healmost never did.
I made my way to Classroom4 right after my last class —fortyminutesearly, just to besafe. I sat in the hallwith my back against the walland read myAmerican history
textbook (kind of remedial reading for me, to be honest)
untilAlaskashowed up and sat down next to me.
She waschewing on her bottomlip, and Iasked whether
she was nervous.
"Well, yeah. Listen, just sit tight and don't talk,"she told me.
"You don't need to be nervous. But this is the seventh
time I've been caught smoking. I just don't want—
whatever. I don't want to upsetmy dad."
"Does your momsmoke or something?"Iasked.
"Notanymore,"Alaskasaid. "It's fine. You'll befine."
"Notanymore,"Alaskasaid. "It's fine. You'll befine."
I didn't start to worry until it got to be 4:50 and the Colonel and Takumi were still unaccounted for. The members of the Jury filed in one by one, walking past us without any eye contact, which made me feel worse. I
counted alltwelve by 4:56, plus the Eagle.
At 4:58, the Colonel and Takumi rounded the corner
toward theclassrooms.
I never saw anything like it. Takumi wore a starched white shirt with a red tie with a black paisley print; the Colonel wore his wrinkled pink button-down and
flamingo tie. They walked in step, heads up and
shoulders back, likesome kind ofaction-movie heroes.
I heard Alaska sigh. "The Colonel's doing his Napoleon walk."
"It's all good," the Colonel told me. "Just don't say
anything."
We walked in—two of us wearing ties, and two of us wearing ratty T-shirts—and the Eagle banged an honestto-God gavelagainst the podiumin front of him. TheJury
sat in a line behind a rectangular table. At the front ofthe
room, by the blackboard, were four chairs. We sat
down,and the Colonelexplained exactlywhat happened.
"Alaska and I were smoking down by the lake. We
usually go off campus, but we forgot. We're sorry. It won't happen again."
I didn't know what was going on. But I knewmy job:sit
tight and shut up. One of the kids looked at Takumiand
asked, "Whatabout you and Halter?"
"We were keeping themcompany,"Takumisaid calmly.
The kid turned to the Eaglethen and asked, "Did you see
anyonesmoking?"
"I only sawAlaska, but Chip ran away, which struck me
as cowardly, as does Miles and Takumi's aw-shucks
routine,"the Eagle said, giving me the Look of Doom. I
didn't want to look guilty, but Icouldn't hold his stare, so
I just looked down atmy hands.
The Colonel gritted his teeth, like it pained himto lie. "It
is thetruth, sir."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 25 of 88
The Eagle asked ifany of us wanted to say anything, and
then asked if there were any more questions, and then
sent us outside.
"What the hell was that?" I asked Takumi when we got
outside.
"Justsit tight, Pudge."
Why have Alaska confess when she'd already been in
trouble so many times? Why the Colonel, who literally
couldn'tafford to get in serious trouble? Why not me?I'd
never been busted for anything. I had the least to lose. Afteracouple minutes, the Eaglecame outand motioned
for us to come back inside.
"Alaska and Chip,"a member of the Jury said, "you get
ten work hours—doing dishes in the cafeteria—and
you're both officially one problem away from a phone
call home. Takumiand Miles, there's nothing in the rules
about watching someone smoke, but the Jury will
about watching someone smoke, but the Jury will
remember your story if you break therulesagain. Fair?"
"Fair," Alaska said quickly, obviously relieved. On my way out, the Eagle spun me around. "Don't abuse your
privilegesat this school, youngman, or youwillregret it."
I nodded.
eighty-nine days before
"we found you a girlfriend," Alaska said to me. Still,
no one had explained to me what happened the week
before with the Jury. It didn't seem to have affected Alaska, though, who was 1. in our roomafter dark with
the doorclosed, and 2. smoking acigaretteas shesat on
the mostly foamcouch. She had stuffed a towel into the
bottomof our doorand insisted it was safe, but I worried —about thecigaretteand the"girlfriend."
"All I have to do now,"she said, "is convince you to like
herand convince her to like you."
"Monumental tasks,"the Colonel pointed out. He lay on
thetop bunk, reading for his English class. Moby-Dick.
"Howcan you read and talk at thesametime?"Iasked.
"Well, I usually can't, but neither the book nor the
conversation is particularly intellectually challenging."
"I likethat book,"Alaskasaid.
"Yes."The Colonelsmiled and leaned over to look at her
from his top bunk. "You would. Big white whale is a metaphor for everything. You live for pretentious metaphors."
Alaska was unfazed. "So, Pudge, what's your feeling on
theformer Soviet bloc?"
"Urn. I'min favor ofit?"
She flicked the ashes of her cigarette into my pencil
holder. I almost protested, but why bother. "You know
that girl in our precalc class," Alaska said, "soft voice,
says thees, not this. Knowthat girl?"
"Yeah. Lara. She sat on my lap on the way to McDonald's."
"Right. I know. And she liked you. You thought she was
quietly discussing precalc, when she was clearly talking
about having hot sex with you. Which is why you need me."
"She has great breasts,"the Colonelsaid without looking
up fromthe whale.
"DO NOT OBJECTIFY WOMEN'S BODIES!" Alaskashouted.
Nowhelooked up. "Sorry. Perky breasts."
"That's notany better!"
"Sure it is," he said. "Great is a judgment on a woman's
body. Perky is merely an observation. They are perky. I mean, Christ."
"You're hopeless," she said. "So she thinks you're cute,
Pudge."
"Nice."
"Doesn't mean anything. Problemwith you is that if you
talk to her you'll"uh umuh' your way to disaster."
"Don't be so hard on him,"the Colonel interrupted, as if
he was my mom. "God, I understand whale anatomy.
he was my mom. "God, I understand whale anatomy. Canwe move on now, Herman?"
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 26 of 88
"So Jake is going to be in Birminghamthis weekend, and we're going on a triple date. Well, triple and a half, since Takumiwill be there, too. Very low pressure. Youwon't
be able to screw up, because I'll be there the whole
time."
"Okay."
"Who's my date?"the Colonelasked.
"Your girlfriend is your date."
"All right," he said, and then deadpanned, "but we don't
getalong verywell."
"So Friday? Do you have plans for Friday?"And then I
laughed, because the Coloneland I didn't have plans for
this Friday, or for any other Friday for the rest of our
lives.
"I didn't think so." She smiled. "Now, we gotta go do
dishes in the cafeteria, Chipper. God, the sacrifices I make."
eighty-seven days before
our triple-and-a-half date started off well enough. I was in Alaska's room—for the sake of getting me a
girlfriend, she'd agreed to iron a green button-down shirt
for me—when Jake showed up. With blond hair to his
shoulders, dark stubble on his cheeks, and the kind of
faux-ruggedness that gets you a career as a catalog
faux-ruggedness that gets you a career as a catalog model, Jake was every bit as good-looking and you'd
expect Alaska's boyfriend to be. She jumped onto him
and wrapped her legs around him(God forbid anyone
ever does that to me, I thought. Ill fall over). I'd heard Alaskatalk about kissing, but I'd never seen her kiss
until then: As he held her by her waist, she leaned
forward, her pouty lips parted, her head just slightly
tilted, and enveloped his mouth with such passion that I
felt I should look away but couldn't. Agood while later,
she untangled herselffromJakeand introduced me.
"This is Pudge,"shesaid. Jakeand I shook hands.
"I've heard a lot about ya." He spoke with a slight
Southern accent, one of the few I'd heard outside of McDonald's. "I hope your date works out tonight, 'cause
I wouldn't want you stealin' Alaska out fromunder me."
"God, you're so adorable," Alaska said before I could
answer, kissing him again. "I'm sorry." She laughed. "I
justcan'tseemto stop kissingmy boyfriend."
I put onmy freshly starched green shirt, and the three of
us gathered up the Colonel, Sara, Lara, and Takumiand
then walked to the gym to watch the Culver Creek Nothings take on Harsden Academy, a private day
schoolinMountainBrook, Birmingham's richestsuburb.
The Colonel's hatred for Harsden burned with the fire of
a thousand suns. "The only thing I hate more than rich
people," he told me as we walked to the gym, "is stupid
people. And all the kids at Harsden are rich, and they're
alltoo stupid to get into the Creek."
Since we were supposed to be on a date and all, I
thought I'd sit next to Lara at the game, but as I tried to walk past a seated Alaska on my way to Lara, Alaska
shot me a look and patted the empty spot next to her on
shot me a look and patted the empty spot next to her on
the bleachers.
"I'mnotallowed to sit next to my date?"Iasked.
"Pudge, one of us has been a girl her whole life. The
other of us has never gotten to second base. If I were
you, I'd sit down, look cute, and be your pleasantly aloof
self."
"Okay. Whatever you say."
Jake said, "That's pretty much my strategy for pleasing Alaska."
"Aww," she said, "so sweet! Pudge, did I tell you that
Jake is recording an album with his band? They're
fantastic. They'relike Radiohead meets the Flaming Lips. Did I tell you that I came up with their name, Hickman Territory?"And then, realizing she was being silly:
"Did I tell you that Jake is hung like a horse and a
beautiful, sensuallover?"
"Baby, Jesus."Jakesmiled. "Not in front ofthe kids."
I wanted to hate Jake, ofcourse, but as I watched them
together, smiling and fumbling all overeach other, I didn't
hate him. I wanted to be him, sure, but I tried to
remember I was ostensibly on a date with someoneelse.
Harsden Academy's star player was a six-foot-seven Goliath named Travis Eastman that everyone—even his mother, I suspect—called the Beast. The first time the Beast got to the free-throw line, the Colonel could not
keep himselffromswearingwhile hetaunted:
"You owe everything to your daddy, you stupid redneck
bastard."
The Beast turned around and glared, and the Colonel
almost got kicked out after the first free throw, but he
smiled at therefand said,
"Sorry!"
"I want to stay around for a good part of this one," he
said to me.
At thestart ofthesecond half, with the Creek down by a
surprisingly slim margin of twenty-four points and the Beast at the foul line, the Colonel looked at Takumiand
said, "It's time." Takumiand the Colonelstood up as the
crowd went, "Shhh..."
"I don't know if this is the best time to tell you this,"the Colonel shouted at the Beast, "but Takumi here hooked
up with your girlfriend just beforethe game."
That made everyone laugh—except the Beast, who
turned fromthe free throw line and walked calmly, with
the ball, toward us.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 27 of 88
"I think werun now,"Takumisaid.
"I haven't gotten kicked out,"the Colonelanswered.
"Later,"Takumisaid.
I don't know whether it was the generalanxiety of being
on a date (albeit one with my would-be date sitting five
people away from me) or the specific anxiety of having
the Beast stare in my direction, but for some reason, I
took off running after Takumi. I thought we were in the
took off running after Takumi. I thought we were in the
clear as we began to round the corner of the bleachers,
but then I saw, out of the corner ofmy eye, a cylindrical
orange object getting bigger and bigger, like a fastapproaching sun.
I thought:/ think that is going to hit me.
I thought:J should duck.
But in thetime betweenwhen something gets thoughtand when it gets done, the ball hit me square across the side
of the face. I fell, the back of my head slamming against
the gymfloor. I then stood up immediately, as if unhurt,
and left the gym.
Pride had gottenme offthe floor ofthe gym, butas soon
as I was outside, I sat down.
"I amconcussed,"I announced, entirely sure of my selfdiagnosis.
"You'refine,"Takumisaid as hejogged back toward me.
"Let's get out of here before we're killed."
"I'msorry,"I said. "But I can't get up. I have suffered a mild concussion."
Lararan outand sat down next to me.
"Are you okay?"
"Iamconcussed,"I said.
Takumisat downwithmeand looked mein theeye. "Do
you knowwhat happened to you?"
"The Beast gotme."
"Do you knowwhere you are?"
"Do you knowwhere you are?"
"I'mon atriple-and-a-half date."
"You'refine,"Takumisaid. "Let's go."
And then I leaned forward and threw up onto Lara's
pants. I can't say why I didn't lean backward or to the
side. I leaned forward and aimed my mouth toward her
jeans—a nice, butt-flattering pair of jeans, the kind of
pants a girl wears when she wants to look nice but not
look like she is trying to look nice—and I threw up all
over them.
Mostly peanut butter, butalso clearly somecorn.
"Oh!"shesaid, surprised and slightly horrified.
"OhGod,"I said. "I'mso sorry."
"I think youmight have a concussion," Takumisaid, as if
theidea had never been suggested.
"I am suffering from the nausea and dizziness typically
associated with a mild concussion," I recited. While Takumiwent to get the Eagle and Lara changed pants, I
lay on the concrete sidewalk. The Eagle came back with
the school nurse, who diagnosed me with—get this—a
concussion, and then Takumi drove me to the hospital with Lara riding shotgun. Apparently I lay in the back
and slowly repeated the words
"The. Symptoms. Generally. Associated. With. Concussion."
So I spent my dateat the hospitalwith Laraand Takumi. The doctor told me to go home and sleep a lot, but to make sure and have someone wake me up every four
hours or so.
hours or so.
I vaguely remember Lara standing in the doorway, the
roomdark and the outside dark and everythingmild and
comfortable but sort of spinny, the world pulsing as if
from a heavy bass beat. And I vaguely remember Lara
smiling at me from the doorway, the glittering ambiguity
ofa girl's smile, which seems to promisean answer to the
question but never gives it. The question, the one we've
all been asking since girls stopped being gross, the
question that is too simpleto be uncomplicated:Does she
like me or like me? And then I fell deeply, endlessly
asleep and slept until three in the morning, when the Colonelwoke me up.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 28 of 88
"She dumped me,"hesaid.
"Iamconcussed,"I responded.
"So I heard. Hence mywaking you up. Video game?"
"Okay. But keep it onmute. My head hurts."
"Yeah. Heard you puked onLara. Very suave."
"Dumped?"Iasked, getting up.
"Yeah. Sara told Jake that I had a hard-on for Alaska. Those words. In that order. And I was like, 'Well, I don't
have a hard-on for anything at this moment. You can
check if you'd like,' and Sara thought I was being too
glib, I suppose, because then she said she knew for a
fact I'd hooked up with Alaska. Which, incidentally, is
ridiculous. I. Don't. Cheat," he said, and finally the game
finished loading and I half listened as I drove a stock car
finished loading and I half listened as I drove a stock car
in circles around a silent track in Talladega. The circles
nauseated me, but I keptat it.
"So Alaska went ballistic, basically." He affected Alaska's voice then, making it more shrilland headacheinducing than itactuallywas.
"'No woman should ever lie about another woman! You've violated the sacred covenant between women! How will stabbing one another in the back help women
to rise above patriarchal oppression?!' And so on. And
then Jake came to Alaska's defense, saying that she would never cheat because she loved him, and then I was like, 'Don't worry about Sara. She just likes bullying
people.' And then Sara asked me why I never stood up
for her, and somewhere in there I called her a crazy
bitch, which didn't go over particularlywell.And then the waitress asked us to leave, and so we were standing in
the parking lot and she said, 'I've had enough,' and I just
stared at herand shesaid, 'Our relationship is over.'"
He stopped talking then. "'Our relationship is over?'" I
repeated. I felt very spacey and thought it was just best
to repeat the last phrase ofwhatever the Colonelsaid so
hecould keep talking.
"Yeah. So that's it. You know what's lame, Pudge? I
really care about her. I mean, we were hopeless. Badly matched. But still. I mean, I said I loved her. I lost my
virginity to her."
"You lost your virginity to her?"
"Yeah. Yeah. I never told you that? She's the only girl
I've slept with. I don't know. Even though we fought,
like, ninety-four percent ofthetime, I'mreally sad."
"You'rereally sad?"
"You'rereally sad?"
"Sadder than I thought I'd be, anyway. I mean, I knew it was inevitable. We haven't had a pleasant moment this whole year. Ever since I got here, I mean, we were just
on each other relentlessly. I should have been nicer to
her. I don't know. It's sad."
"It is sad,"I repeated.
"I mean, it's stupid to miss someone you didn't even get
along with. But, I don't know, it was nice, you know,
having someone you could always fight with."
"Fighting," I said, and then, confused, barely able to
drive, Iadded, "is nice."
"Right. I don't knowwhat I'll do now. I mean, it was nice
to have her. I'm a mad guy, Pudge. What do I do with
that?"
"You can fight withme,"I said. I put my controller down
and leaned back on our foamcouch and was asleep. As
I drifted off, I heard the Colonel say, "I can't be mad at
you, you harmless skinny bastard."
eighty-four days before
three days later, the rain began. My head still hurt, and
the sizable knot above my left temple looked, the Colonel thought, likea miniaturized topographicalmap of Macedonia, which I had not previously known was a
place, let alone a country. And as the Colonel and I walked over the parched, half-dead grass that Monday, I
said, "I suppose we could use some rain," and the Colonel looked up at the low clouds coming in fast and
threatening, and then he said, "Well, use it or not, we're
sureas shit going to getsome."
And we sure as shit did. Twenty minutes into French
And we sure as shit did. Twenty minutes into French
class, Madame O'Malley was conjugating the verb to
believein thesubjunctive.
Que je croie. Que tu croies. Qu'ill ou qu'elle croie.
She said it over and over, like it wasn't a verb so much
asa Buddhistmantra. Quejecroie; quetu croies; qu'ill
ou qu'elle croie. What a funny thing to say over and
overagain:I would believe; youwould believe; he or she would believe. Believe what? I thought, and right then,
therain came.
It came allat once and in a furious torrent, like God was mad and wanted to flood us out. Day after day, night
after night, it rained. It rained so that Icouldn'tseeacross
the dorm circle, so that the lake swelled up and lapped
against the Adirondack swing, swallowing half ofthefake
beach. By the third day, I abandoned my umbrella
entirely and walked around in a perpetual state of wetness. Everything at the cafeteria tasted like the minor
acid of rainwater and everything stank of mildew and
showers became ludicrously inappropriate because the whole goddamned world had better water pressure than
theshowers.
And the rain made hermits of us all. The Colonel spent
every not-in-class moment sitting on the couch, reading
the almanac and playing video games, and I wasn't sure whether he wanted to talk or whether he just wanted to
sit on the whitefoamand drink hisambrosiain peace.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 29 of 88
After the disaster that was our "date,"I felt it best not to
speak to Lara under any circumstances, lest I suffer a
concussion and/oran attack of puking, even though she'd
concussion and/oran attack of puking, even though she'd
told mein precalcthe next day that it was"no beeg deal."
And I saw Alaska only in class and could never talk to
her, because she came to every class late and left the moment the bell rang, before I could even cap my pen
and close my notebook. On thefifth evening oftherain, I walked into thecafeteriafully prepared to go back to my
room and eat a reheated bufriedo for dinner if Alaska
and/or Takumi weren't eating (I knew full well the Colonelwas inRoom43, dining onmilk 'n' vodka). But I
stayed, becauseI sawAlaskasitting alone, her back to a
rain-streaked window. I grabbed a heaping plate of fried
okraand sat down next to her.
"God, it's likeit'll neverend,"I said, referring to therain.
"Indeed,"she said. Her wet hair hung fromher head and mostly covered her face. Iatesome. Sheatesome.
"How've you been?"I finally asked.
"I'm really not up for answering any questions that start with how, when, where, why, or what."
"What's wrong?"Iasked.
"That's a what. I'mnot doingwhat's right now. Allright,
I should go."She pursed her lipsand exhaled slowly, like
the way the Colonel blewoutsmoke.
"What—"Then I stopped myself and reworded. "Did I
do something?"Iasked.
She gathered her tray and stood up before answering.
"Ofcourse not, sweetie."
Her "sweetie" felt condescending, not romantic, like a
boy enduring his first biblical rainstormcouldn't possibly
boy enduring his first biblical rainstormcouldn't possibly
understand her problems—whatever theywere. It took a
sincere effort not to roll my eyes at her, though she wouldn't have even noticed as she walked out of the
cafeteria with her hair dripping over her face.
seventy-six days before
"I FEELBETTER," the Colonel told me on the ninth
day oftherainstormas hesat down next to mein religion
class. "I had an epiphany. Do you remember that night when she came to the room and was a complete and
total bitch?"
"Yeah. The opera. Theflamingo tie."
"Right."
"Whatabout it?"Iasked.
The Colonel pulled out a spiral notebook, the top half of which was soaking wet, and slowly pulled the pages
apart until he found his place. "That was the epiphany.
She'sacompleteand total bitch."
Hyde hobbled in, leaning heavily on a black cane. As he made his way toward his chair, he drily noted, "My trick
knee is warning me that we might have some rain. So
prepare yourselves." He stood in front of his chair,
leaned back cautiously, grabbed it with both hands, and
collapsed into the chair with a series of quick, shallow
breaths—likea woman in labor.
"Although it isn't due for more than two months, you'll be
receiving your paper topic for this semester today. Now,
I'm quite sure that you've all read the syllabus for this
class with such frequency and seriousness that by now
you've committed it to memory." He smirked. "But a
reminder: This paper is fifty percent of your grade. I
encourage you to takeit seriously. Now, about this Jesus
fellow."
Hyde talked about the Gospel of Mark, which I hadn't
read until the day before, although I was a Christian. I
guess. I'd been to church, uh, like four times. Which is more frequently than I'd been to a mosque or a
synagogue.
He told us that in the first century, around the time of
Jesus, some of the Roman coins had a picture of the Emperor Augustus on them, and that beneath his picture wereinscribed the words Filius Dei. The Son ofGod.
"We are speaking," he said, "ofa time inwhich gods had
sons. It was not so unusual to be a son of God. The miracle, at least in that time and in that place, was that
Jesus—a peasant, a Jew, a nobody in an empire ruled
exclusively by somebodies—was the son ofthat God,
the all-powerful God of Abraham and Moses. That God's sonwas notan emperor. Noteven atrained rabbi. A peasant and a Jew. A nobody like you. While the Buddha was special because he abandoned his wealth
and noble birth to seek enlightenment, Jesus was special
because he lacked wealth and noble birth, but inherited
the ultimate nobility:King of Kings. Class over. You can
pick up a copy of your finalexamon the way out. Stay
dry." It wasn't until I stood up to leave that I noticed Alaska had skipped class—how could she skip the only
class worth attending? I grabbed a copy of the final for
her.
The final exam:What is the most important question
human beings must answer? Choose your question wisely, and then examine how Islam, Buddhism, and
Christianity attempt to answer it
"I hope that poor bastard lives the rest of the school
"I hope that poor bastard lives the rest of the school
year," the Colonel said as we jogged home through the
rain, "because I'm sure
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 30 of 88
starting to enjoy that class. What's your most important
question?"
After thirty seconds of running, I was already winded.
"What happens...to us...whenwe die?"
"Christ, Pudge, if you don't stop running, you're going to
find out."He slowed to a walk. "My question is:Why do
good people get rotten lots in life? Holy shit, is that Alaska?"
She was running at us at full speed, and she was
screaming, but I couldn't hear her over the pounding rain
until she was so close to us that I could see her spit
flying.
"The fuckers flooded my room. They ruined like a
hundred of my books! Goddamned pissant Weekday Warrior shit. Colonel, they poked a holein the gutterand
connected a plastic tube from the gutter down through my back window into my room! The whole place is
soakingwet. My copy ofThe General in His Labyrinth
isabsolutely ruined."
"That's pretty good," the Colonel said, like an artist
admiring another's work.
"Hey!"sheshouted.
"Sorry. Don't worry, dude," hesaid. "God will punish the wicked. And before He does, we will."
sixty-seven days before
so THIS IS HOW NOAH FELT. You wake up one morning and God has forgiven you and you walk around
squinting all day because you've forgotten how sunlight
feels warmand rough against your skin like a kiss on the
cheek from your dad, and the whole world is brighter
and cleaner than ever before, like central Alabama has
been put in the washing machine for two weeks and
cleaned with extra-superstrength detergent with color
brightener, and now the grass is greener and the
bufriedosarecrunchier.
I stayed by the classrooms that afternoon, lying on my
stomach in the newly dry grassand reading forAmerican
history—the Civil War, or as it was known around these
parts, the War Between the States. To me, it was the war that spawned a thousand good last words. Like GeneralAlbert Sidney Johnston, who, when asked if he was injured, answered, "Yes, and I fear seriously." Or Robert E. Lee, who, many yearsafter the war, in a dying
delirium,announced, "Strikethetent!"
I was mulling over why the Confederate generals had
better last words than the Union ones (Ulysses S. Grant's
last word, "Water," was pretty lame) when I noticed a
shadowblockingmefromthesun. It had been sometime
sinceI'd seen ashadow, and it startled mea bit. I looked
up.
"I brought you a snack," Takumi said, dropping an
oatmealcreampie onto my book.
"Very nutritious."I smiled.
"You've got your oats.You've got your meal.You've got
yourcream. It'safuckin' food pyramid."
"Hell yeah it is."
And then I didn't know what to say. Takumi knew a lot
about hiphop; I knew a lot about last words and video
games. Finally, I said,
"Ican't believethose guys flooded Alaska's room."
"Yeah," Takumisaid, not looking at me. "Well, they had
their reasons. You have to understand that with like
everybody, even the Weekday Warriors, Alaska is
famous for pranking. I mean, last year, we put a Volkswagen Beetle in the library. So if they have a
reason to try and one-up her, they'll try.And that's pretty
ingenious, to divert water fromthe gutter to her room. I mean, I don't want to admireit..."
I laughed. "Yeah. That will be tough to top." I
unwrapped the cream pie and bit into it. Mmm...hundreds of deliciouscalories per bite.
"She'll think of something," he said. "Pudge," he said.
"Hmm. Pudge, you need acigarette. Let's go fora walk."
I felt nervous, as I invariably do when someone says my
nametwice with a hmm in between. But I got up, leaving my books behind, and walked toward the Smoking Hole. But as soon as we got to the edge of the woods, Takumi turned away from the dirt road. "Not sure the Holeis safe,"hesaid. Not safe? I thought. It's thesafest
placeto smoke a cigarettein theknown universe. But
I just followed him through the thick brush, weaving
through pine trees and threatening, chest-high brambly
bushes. After a while, he just sat down. I cupped my
hand around my lighter to protect the flame from the
slight breezeand lit up.
"Alaska ratted out Marya," he said. "So the Eagle might
"Alaska ratted out Marya," he said. "So the Eagle might
know about the Smoking Hole, too. I don't know. I've
never seen himdown that way, but who knows what she
told him."
"Wait, howdo you know?"Iasked, dubious.
"Well, for one thing, I figured it out. And for another, Alaska admitted it. She told me at least part of the truth,
that rightat theend ofschool last year, shetried to sneak
offcampus one night after lights-out to go visit Jake and
then got busted. She said she wascareful—no headlights
or anything—but the Eagle caught her, and she had a
bottle of wine in her car, so she was fucked. And the Eagletook her into his houseand gave her thesame offer
he gives to everyone when they get fatally busted. 'Either
tell me everything you know or go to your room and
pack up your stuff.' So Alaska broke and told him that Marya and Paul were drunk and in her roomright then. And then she told him God
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 31 of 88
knows what else. And so the Eagle let her go, because
he needs rats to do his job. She was smart, really, to rat
on one of her friends, because no one ever thinks to
blame the friends. That's why the Colonel is so sure it was Kevin and his boys. I didn't believe it could be Alaska, either, until I figured out that she was the only
person on campus who could've knownwhat Marya was
doing. I suspected Paul's roommate, Longwell—one of
the guys who pulled the armless-mermaid bit on you. Turns out he wasat home that night. His aunt had died. I
checked the obit in the paper. Hollis Burnis Chase—hell
ofa namefora woman."
"So the Colonel doesn't know?" I asked, stunned. I put
"So the Colonel doesn't know?" I asked, stunned. I put
out my cigarette, even though I wasn't quite finished,
because I felt spooked. I'd never suspected Alaska
could be disloyal. Moody, yes. But notarat.
"No, and he can't know, because he'll go crazy and get
herexpelled. The Colonel takes all this honor and loyalty
shit pretty seriously, if you haven't noticed."
"I've noticed."
Takumishook his head, his hands pushing asideleaves to
dig into the still-wet dirt beneath. "I just don't get why
she'd be so afraid of getting expelled. I'd hate to get
expelled, but you haveto take your lumps. I don't get it."
"Well, she obviously doesn't like home."
"True. She only goes home over Christmas and the
summer, when Jake is there. But whatever. I don't like
home, either. But I'd never give the Eagle the
satisfaction."Takumi picked up a twig and dug it into the
soft red dirt. "Listen, Pudge. I don't know what kind of
prankAlaska and the Colonelare going to come up with
to end this, but I'msure we'll both beinvolved. I'mtelling
you all this so you can know what you're getting into,
becauseif you getcaught, you had better takeit."
I thought of Florida, of my "school friends,"and realized
for the first time how much I would miss the Creek if I
ever had to leave it. I stared down at Takumi's twig
sticking erect out of the mud and said, "I swear to God I won't rat."
I finally understood that day at the Jury:Alaska wanted
to show us that we could trust her. Survival at Culver Creek meant loyalty, and she had ignored that. But then
she'd shownme the way. She and the Colonel had taken
the fall for me to show me how it was done, so I would
the fall for me to show me how it was done, so I would
knowwhat to do when thetimecame.
fifty-eight days before
about AWEEK LATER I woke up at 6:30—6:30 on
a Saturday!—to the sweet melody of Decapitation:
automatic gunfire blasted out above the menacing, bassheavy background music ofthe video game. I rolled over
and sawAlaska pulling the controller up and to the right,
as if that would help her escape certain death. I had the
same bad habit.
"Can you at leastmuteit?"
"Pudge," shesaid, faux-condescending, "thesound isan
integral part of the artistic experience of this video game. Muting Decapitation would be like reading only every
other word ofJane Eyre. The Colonel woke up about
half an hour ago. He seemed a little annoyed, so I told
himto go sleep inmy room."
"MaybeI'lljoin him,"I said groggily.
Rather than answeringmy question, she remarked, "So I
heard Takumi told you. Yeah, I ratted out Marya, and
I'm sorry, and I'll never do it again. In other news, are
you staying herefor Thanksgiving? BecauseIam."
I rolled back toward the wall and pulled the comforter
over my head. I didn't knowwhether to trust Alaska,and
I'd certainly had enough of her unpredictability—cold
one day, sweet the next; irresistibly flirty one moment,
resistibly obnoxious the next. I preferred the Colonel:At
least when he wascranky, he had areason.
In a testament to the power of fatigue, I managed to fall
asleep quickly, convinced that the shrieking of dying monsters and Alaska's delighted squeals upon killing
themwere nothing more than a pleasant sound track by
themwere nothing more than a pleasant sound track by which to dream. I woke up halfan hour later, when she
sat down on my bed, her butt against my hip. Her
underwear, her jeans, the comforter, my corduroys,
and my boxers between us, I thought.
Five layers, and yet I felt it, the nervous warmth of
touching—a palereflection ofthefireworks of one mouth
on another, but a reflection nonetheless. And in the
almost-ness of the moment, I cared at least enough. I wasn't sure whether I liked her, and I doubted whether I
could trust her, but I cared at least enough to try to find
out. Her on my bed, wide green eyes staring down at me. The enduring mystery of her sly, almost smirking,
smile. Fivelayers between us.
She continued as if I hadn't been asleep. "Jake has to
study. So he doesn't want me in Nashville. Says he can't
pay attention to musicology while staring at me. I said I would wear a burka, but he wasn't convinced, so I'm
staying here."
"I'msorry,"I said.
"Oh, don't be. I'll have loads to do. There's a prank to
plan. But I was thinking you should stay here, too. In
fact, I havecomposed alist."
"Alist?"
She reached into her pocket and pulled out a heavily
folded piece of notebook paperand began to read.
"Why Pudge Should Stay at the Creek for
Thanksgiving: A List, byAlaska Young.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 32 of 88
"One. Because heisa very conscientious student, Pudge
has been deprived of many wonderful Culver Creek
experiences, including but not limited to A. drinking wine with me in the woods, and B. getting up early on a
Saturday to eat breakfast at Mclnedible and then driving
through the greater Birmingham area smoking cigarettes
and talking about how pathetically boring the greater Birminghamareais,and also C.
going out late at night and lying in the dewy soccer field
and reading a Kurt Vonnegut book bymoonlight.
"Two. Although she certainly does not excel at
endeavors such as teaching the French language, Madame O'Malley makes a mean stuffing, and she
invites all the students who stay on campus to Thanksgiving dinner. Which is usually just me and the
South Korean exchange student, but whatever. Pudge would be welcome.
"Three. I don't really have a Three, but One and Two wereawfully good."
One and Two appealed to me, certainly, but mostly I
liked the idea ofjust herand just me on campus. "I'll talk
to my parents. Once they wake up,"I said. She coaxed me onto the couch, and we played Decapitation together
untilsheabruptly dropped thecontroller.
"I'm not flirting. I'm just tired," she said, kicking off her
flip-flops. She pulled her feet onto the foam couch,
tucking thembehind acushion, and scooted up to put her
head inmy lap. My corduroys. My boxers. Two layers. I
could feelthe warmth of hercheek onmy thigh.
There are times when it is appropriate, even preferable,
There are times when it is appropriate, even preferable,
to get an erection when someone's face is in close
proximity to your penis.
This was not one ofthosetimes.
So I stopped thinking about the layers and the warmth, muted the TV,and focused onDecapitation.
At 8:30, I turned off the game and scooted out from
underneath Alaska. She turned onto her back, still
asleep, the lines of my corduroy pants imprinted on her
cheek.
I usually only called my parents on Sunday afternoons, so whenmymomheard my voice, sheinstantly overreacted.
"What's wrong, Miles? Are you okay?"
"I'm fine, Mom. I think—if it's okay with you, I think I might stay here for Thanksgiving. Alot ofmy friends are
staying"—lie—"and I have a lot ofwork to do"—double
lie. "I had no idea how hard the classes would be, Mom"—truth.
"Oh, sweetie. We miss you so much. And there's a big Thanksgiving turkey waiting for you. And all the
cranberry sauce you can eat."
I hated cranberry sauce, but for some reason my mom
persisted in her lifelong belief that it was my very favorite
food, even though every single Thanksgiving I politely
declined to includeit onmy plate.
"I know, Mom. I miss you guys, too. But I reallywant to
do well here"—truth—"and plus it's really nice to have,
like, friends"—truth.
I knew that playing the friend card would sell her on the
idea, and it did. So I got her blessing to stay on campus
after promising to hang out with themfor everyminute of
after promising to hang out with themfor everyminute of
Christmas break (as ifI had other plans).
I spent the morning at the computer, flipping back and
forth between my religion and English papers. There were only two weeks of classes before exams—the
coming one and the one after Thanksgiving—and so far,
the best personal answer I had to "What happens to
peopleafter they die?"was"Well, something. Maybe."
The Colonel came in at noon, his thick ubermath book
cradled in hisarms.
"I justsawSara,"hesaid.
"How'd that work out for ya?"
"Bad. She said she still loved me. God, 'I love you' really
is the gateway drug of breaking up. Saying 'I love you' while walking across the dorm circle inevitably leads to
saying 'I love you' while you're doing it. So I just bolted."
I laughed. He pulled out a notebook and sat down at his
desk.
"Yeah. Ha-ha. So Alaskasaid you'restaying here."
"Yeah. I feel a little guilty about ditching my parents,
though."
"Yeah, well. If you'restaying herein hopes ofmaking out withAlaska, I sure wish youwouldn't. If you unmoor her
from the rock that is Jake, God have mercy on us all. That would be some drama, indeed. And as a rule, I like
to avoid drama."
"It's not becauseI want to make out with her."
"Hold on." He grabbed a pencil and scrawled excitedly
at the paper as if he'd just made a mathematical
at the paper as if he'd just made a mathematical
breakthrough and then looked back up at me. "I just did
some calculations, and I've been able to determine that
you'refull ofshit."
And he was right. How could I abandon my parents, who were niceenough to pay for my education at Culver Creek, my parents who had always loved me, just
because I maybe liked some girl with a boyfriend? How
could I leave themalone with a giant turkey and mounds
of inedible cranberry sauce? So during third period, I
called mymomat work. I wanted her to say it was okay,
I guess, for me to stay at the Creek
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 33 of 88
for Thanksgiving, but I didn't quite expect her to
excitedly tell me that she and Dad had bought plane
tickets to England immediately after I called and were
planning to spend Thanksgiving in a castle on their
second honeymoon.
"Oh, that—that's awesome,"I said, and then quickly got
off the phone because I did not want her to hear me cry.
I guess Alaska heard me slamdown the phone fromher
room, because she opened the door as I turned away,
but said nothing. I walked across the dorm circle, and
then straight through the soccer field, bushwhacking
through the woods, until I ended up on the banks of
Culver Creek just down from the bridge. I sat with my
butt on a rock and my feet in the dark dirt of the creek
bed and tossed pebbles into the clear, shallow water,
and they landed with an empty plop, barely audible over
the rumbling of the creek as it danced its way south. The
light filtered through theleavesand pine needlesaboveas
ifthrough lace, the ground spotted in shadow.
I thought of the one thing about home that I missed, my
dad's study with its built-in, floor-to-ceiling shelves
sagging with thick biographies, and the black leather
chair that kept me just uncomfortable enough to keep
from feeling sleepy as I read. It was stupid, to feel as
upset as I did. I ditched them, but it felt the other way
around. Still, I felt unmistakably homesick.
I looked up toward the bridge and sawAlaska sitting on
one of the blue chairs at the Smoking Hole, and though
I'd thought I wanted to be alone, I found myself saying,
"Hey." Then, when she did not turn to me, I screamed,
"Alaska!"She walked over.
"I was looking for you,"shesaid, joiningme on therock.
"Hey."
"I'm really sorry, Pudge," she said, and put her arms
around me, resting her head against my shoulder. It
occurred to me that she didn't even know what had
happened, butshestillsounded sincere.
"WhatamI going to do?"
"You'llspend Thanksgivingwithme, silly. Here."
"So why don't you go homefor vacations?"Iasked her.
"I'm just scared of ghosts, Pudge. And home is full of
them."
fifty-two days before
after everyone left; after the Colonel's mom showed
up in a beat-up hatchback and he threw his giant duffel
bag into the backseat; and after he said, "I'm not much
for saying good-bye. I'll see you in a week. Don't do
anything I wouldn't do"; and after a green limousine
anything I wouldn't do"; and after a green limousine
arrived for Lara, whose father was the only doctor in
some small town in southernAlabama; and after I joined Alaska on a harrowing, we-don't-need-no-stinkingbrakes drive to the airport to drop off Takumi; and after
the campus settled into an eerie quiet, with no doors
slamming and no music playing and no one laughing and
no one screaming;afterall that:We made our way down
to the soccer field, and she took me to edge of the field where the woods start, the same steps I'd walked onmy way to being thrown into the lake. Beneath the fullmoon
shecastashadow, and you could seethecurvefromher waist to her hips in the shadow, and after a while she
stopped and said, "Dig."
And I said, "Dig?"and she said, "Dig,"and we went on
like that for a bit, and then I got on my knees and dug
through the soft black dirt at the edge of the woods, and
before I could get very far, my fingers scratched glass,
and I dug around the glass until I pulled out a bottle of
pink wine—Strawberry Hill, it was called, I suppose
because if it had not tasted like vinegar with a dash of maplesyrup, itmight havetasted likestrawberries.
"I have a fake ID,"she said, "but it sucks. So every time
I go to the liquor store, I try to buy ten bottles of this,
and some vodka for the Colonel. And so when it finally works, I'mcovered for a semester. And then I give the Colonel his vodka, and he puts it wherever he puts it,
and I take mineand bury it."
"Because you'rea pirate,"I said.
"Aye, matey. Precisely. Although wine consumption has
risen a bit this semester, so we'll need to take a trip
tomorrow. This is thelast bottle."She unscrewed thecap —no corks here—sipped, and handed it to me. "Don't worry about the Eagletonight,"shesaid.
"He's just happy most everyone's gone. He's probably masturbating for thefirst timein a month."
I worried about it for a moment as I held the bottle by
the neck, but I wanted to trust her, and so I did. I took a minor sip, and as soon as I swallowed, I felt my body
rejecting the stinging syrup of it. It washed back up my
esophagus, but I swallowed hard, and there, yes, I did it.
I was drinking on campus.
So we lay in the tall grass between the soccer field and
the woods, passing the bottle back and forth and tilting
our heads up to sip the wince-inducing wine. As
promised in the list, she brought a Kurt Vonnegut book, Cat's Cradle, and she read aloud to me, her soft voice mingling with the the frogs' croaking and the
grasshoppers landing softly around us. I did not hear her words so much as the cadence of her voice. She'd
obviously read the book many times before, and so she
read flawlessly and confidently, and I could hear her
smile in the reading of it, and the sound of that smile made me think that maybe I would like novels better if Alaska Young read them to me. After a while, she put
down the book, and I felt warmbut not drunk with the
bottle resting between us—my chest touching the bottle
and herchest touching the bottle but us not touching each
other,and then she placed her hand onmy leg.
Her hand just above my knee, the palm flat and soft
against my jeans and her index finger making slow, lazy
circles that crept toward
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 34 of 88
the inside of my thigh, and with one layer between us,
God I wanted her. And lying there, amid the tall, still
grass and beneath the star-drunk sky, listening to the
just-this-side-of-inaudible sound of her rhythmic
breathing and the noisy silence of the bullfrogs, the
grasshoppers, the distant cars rushing endlessly on 1-65,
I thought it might be a fine time to say the Three Little Words. And I steeled myself to say themas I stared up
at that starriest night, convinced myself that she felt it,
too, that her hand so alive and vivid against my leg was more than playful, and fuck Lara and fuck Jake because
I do,AlaskaYoung, I do love you and whatelse matters
but that and my lips parted to speak and before I could
even begin to breathe out the words, she said, "It's not
life or death, thelabyrinth."
"Urn, okay. So what is it?"
"Suffering," she said. "Doing wrong and having wrong
things happen to you. That's the problem. Bolivar was
talking about the pain, notabout the living or dying. How
do you get out ofthelabyrinth ofsuffering?"
"What's wrong?" I asked. And I felt the absence of her
hand onme.
"Nothing's wrong. But there's always suffering, Pudge. Homework or malaria or having a boyfriend who lives far
awaywhen there's a good-looking boy lying next to you.
Suffering is universal. It's the one thing Buddhists, Christians,and Muslimsareallworried about."
I turned to her. "Oh, so maybe Dr. Hyde'sclass isn't total
bullshit."And both of us lying on our sides, she smiled,
our noses almost touching, my unblinking eyes on hers,
her face blushing fromthe wine, and I opened mymouth
again but this time not to speak, and she reached up and
putafinger to my lipsand said, "Shh. Shh. Don't ruin it."
fifty-one days before
the next morning, I didn't hear the knocking, if there was
any.
I just heard, "UP! Do you knowwhat timeit is?!"
I looked at the clock and groggily muttered, "It's seven
thirty-six."
"No, Pudge. It's party time! We've only got seven days
left before everyone comes back. Oh God, I can't even
tell you how nice it is to have you here. Last Thanksgiving, I spent the whole time constructing one massive candle using the wax from all my little candles. God, it was boring. I counted the ceiling tiles. Sixtyseven down, eighty-four across. Talk about suffering! Absolutetorture."
"I'mreally tired. I—"I said,and then shecutme off.
"Poor Pudge. Oh, poor poor Pudge. Do youwant me to
climb into bed with you and cuddle?"
"Well, if you're offering—"
"NO! UP! NOW!"
She took me behind a wing of Weekday Warrior rooms —50 to 59—and stopped in front ofa window, placed
her palms flat against it, and pushed up until the window
was half open, then crawled inside. I followed.
"What do you see, Pudge?"
I saw a dorm room—the same cinder-block walls, the
same dimensions, even thesamelayoutas my own. Their
couch was nicer, and they had an actual coffee table
instead of COFFEE TABLE. They had two posters on
instead of COFFEE TABLE. They had two posters on
the wall. One featured a huge stack of hundred-dollar
bills with the caption THE FIRST MILLION IS THE HARDEST. On the opposite wall, a poster of a red
Ferrari. "Uh, I seea dormroom."
"You're not looking, Pudge. When I go into your room, I
seeacouple of guys who love video games. When I look
at my room, I see a girl who loves books." She walked
over to the couch and picked up a plastic soda bottle.
"Look at this,"she said, and I saw that it was half filled with a brackish, brown liquid. Dip spit. "So they dip. And they obviously aren't hygienic about it. So are they
going to care if we pee on their toothbrushes? They won't care enough, that's for sure. Look. Tell me what
these guys love."
"They love money," I said, pointing to the poster. She
threwup her hands,exasperated.
"They all love money, Pudge. Okay, go into the
bathroom. Tellme what you seethere."
The game was annoying me a little, but I went into the
bathroomas she sat down on that inviting couch. Inside
the shower, I found a dozen bottles of shampoo and
conditioner. In the medicine cabinet, I found a cylindrical
bottle of something called Rewind. I opened it—the
bluish gellsmelled likeflowersand rubbing alcohol, likea
fancy hair salon. (Under the sink, I also found a tub of Vaseline so big that it could have only had one possible
use, which I didn't care to dwell on.) I came back into
theroomand excitedly said, "They lovetheir hair."
"Precisely!" she shouted. "Look on the top bunk."
Perilously positioned on the thin wooden headboard of
the bed,a bottle ofSTAWET
gel. "Kevin doesn't just wake up with that spiky bedhead
gel. "Kevin doesn't just wake up with that spiky bedhead
look, Pudge. He works for it. He loves that hair. They
leave their hair products here, Pudge, because they have
duplicates at home. All those boys do. And you know
why?"
"Because they're compensating for their tiny little
penises?"Iasked.
"Ha ha. No. That's why they're macho assholes. They
love their hair because they aren't smart enough to love
something more interesting. So we hit them where it
hurts:thescalp."
"Ohh-kaay," I said, unsure of how, exactly, to prank
someone's scalp.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 35 of 88
She stood up and walked to the window and bent over
to shimmy out. "Don't look at my ass,"she said, and so I
looked at herass, spreading out widefromher thinwaist.
She effortlessly somersaulted out the half-opened window. I took thefeetfirstapproach, and onceI got my
feet on the ground, I limboed my upper body out the window.
"Well,"she said. "That looked awkward. Let's go to the
SmokingHole."
She shuffled her feet to kick up dry orange dirt on the
road to the bridge, seeming not to walk so much as
cross-country ski. As we followed the almost-trail down
from the bridge to the Hole, she turned around and
looked back at me, stopping. "I wonder how one would
go aboutacquiring industrial-strength blue dye,"she said,
and then held atree branch back for me.
and then held atree branch back for me.
forty-nine days before
two days later— Monday, the first real day of vacation —I spent the morning working on my religion final and went toAlaska's roomin the afternoon. She was reading
in bed.
"Auden,"sheannounced. "What were his last words?"
"Don't know. Never heard of him."
"Never heard of him? You poor, illiterate boy. Here,
read this line." I walked over and looked down at her
index finger. "You shall love your crooked neighbour/ With your crooked heart," I read aloud. "Yeah. That's
pretty good,"I said.
"Pretty good? Sure, and bufriedos are pretty good. Sex
is pretty fun. The sun is pretty hot. Jesus, it says so much
about loveand brokenness—it's perfect."
"Mm-hmm."I nodded unenthusiastically.
"You're hopeless. Wanna go porn hunting?"
"Huh?"
"We can't love our neighbors till we know how crooked
their heartsare. Don't you like porn?"sheasked, smiling.
"Urn,"Ianswered. The truthwas that I hadn't seenmuch
porn, but the idea of looking at porn withAlaska had a
certain appeal.
We started with the 50s wing of dorms and made our way backward around the hexagon—she pushed open
the back windows while I looked out and made sure no
one was walking by.
one was walking by.
I'd never been in most people's rooms. After three months, I knew most people, but I regularly talked to
very few—just the Colonel and Alaska and Takumi,
really. But in a few hours, I got to know my classmates
quite well.
Wilson Carbod, the center for the Culver Creek Nothings, had hemorrhoids, or at least he kept
hemorrhoidalcreamsecreted away in the bottomdrawer
of his desk. Chandra Kilers, acute girlwho loved math a
little too much, and who Alaska believed was the Colonel's future girlfriend, collected Cabbage Patch Kids. I don't mean that she collected Cabbage Patch Kids when she was, like, five. Shecollected themnow—
dozens of them—black, white, Latino, and Asian, boys
and girls, babies dressed like farmhands and budding
businessmen. A senior Weekday Warrior named Holly Moser sketched nude self-portraits in charcoal pencil,
portraying her rotund formin allits girth.
I was stunned by howmany people had booze. Even the Weekday Warriors, who got to go home every weekend, had beer and liquor stashed everywhere from
toilet tanks to the bottoms of dirty-clothes hampers.
"God, Icould haveratted outanyone,"Alaskasaid softly
as she unearthed a forty-ounce bottle of Magnum malt
liquor from Longwell Chase's closet. I wondered, then, why she had chosen Pauland Marya.
Alaska found everyone's secrets so fast that I suspected
she'd done this before, but she couldn't possibly have
had advance knowledge of the secrets of Ruth and Margot Blowker, ninth-grade twin sisters who were new
and seemed to socialize even less than I did. After
crawling into their room, Alaska looked around for a
crawling into their room, Alaska looked around for a moment, then walked to the bookshelf. She stared at it,
then pulled out the King James Bible, and there—a
purple bottle ofMauiWowie winecooler.
"How clever," she said as she twisted off the cap. She
drank it down in two long sips, and then proclaimed,
"MauiWOWIE!"
"They'll knowyouwere here!"I shouted.
Her eyes widened. "Oh no, you're right, Pudge!" she
said.
"Maybe they'll go to the Eagle and tell himthat someone
stole their wine cooler!" She laughed and leaned out the window, throwing theempty bottleinto the grass.
And we found plenty of porn magazines haphazardly
stuffed in between mattresses and box springs. It turns
out that Hank Walsten did like something other than
basketballand pot: he liked Juggs. But we didn't find a movie untilRoom32, occupied by acouple of guys from Mississippi named Joe and Marcus. They were in our
religion class and sometimes sat with the Coloneland me
at lunch, but I didn't knowthemwell.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 36 of 88
Alaska read the sticker on the top of the video. "The Bitches of Madison County. Well. Ain't that just
delightful."
We ranwith it to the TVroom, closed the blinds, locked
the door, and watched the movie. It opened with a woman standing on a bridge with her legs spread while a
guy knelt in front of her, giving her oralsex. No time for
guy knelt in front of her, giving her oralsex. No time for
dialogue, I suppose. By the time they started doing it, Alaska commenced with her righteous indignation. "They
just don't make sex look fun for women. The girl is just
an object. Look! Look at that!"
I was already looking, needless to say. A woman
crouched on her hands and knees while a guy knelt
behind her. She kept saying "Giveit to me"and moaning,
and though hereyes, brown and blank, betrayed her lack
of interest, I couldn't help but take mental notes. Hands
on her shoulders, I noted. Fast, but not too fast or it's
going to be over, fast. Keep your grunting to a minimum.
As if readingmymind, she said, "God, Pudge. Never do
it that hard. That would hurt. That looks like torture. And allshecan do is just sit thereand takeit? This is not
a man and a woman. It's a penis and a vagina. What's
eroticabout that? Where's the kissing?"
"Given their position, I don't think they can kiss right
now,"I noted.
"That's my point. Just by virtue of how they're doing it,
it's objectification. He can't even see her face! This is what can happen to women, Pudge. That woman is
someone's daughter. This is what you make us do for money."
"Well, not me," I said defensively. "I mean, not
technically. I don't, like, produce pornmovies."
"Look me in the eye and tellme this doesn't turn you on,
Pudge."
I couldn't. She laughed. It was fine, she said. Healthy. And then she got up, stopped the tape, lay down on her
stomach across thecouch,and mumbled something.
stomach across thecouch,and mumbled something.
"What did you say?"I asked, walking to her, putting my
hand on thesmall of her back.
"Shhhh,"shesaid. "I'msleeping."
Just like that. Froma hundred miles an hour to asleep in
a nanosecond. I wanted so badly to lie down next to her
on the couch, to wrap my arms around her and sleep. Not fuck, like in those movies. Not even have sex. Just
sleep together, in the most innocentsense ofthe phrase.
But I lacked the courage and she had a boyfriend and I was gawky and she was gorgeous and I was hopelessly
boring and she was endlessly fascinating. So I walked
back to my room and collapsed on the bottom bunk,
thinking that if people were rain, I was drizzle and she wasa hurricane.
forty-seven days before
on Wednesdaymorning, I woke up with a stuffy nose to
an entirely new Alabama, a crisp and cold one. As I walked to Alaska's roomthatmorning, thefrosty grass of
the dorm circle crunched beneath my shoes. You don't
run into frost much in Florida—and I jumped up and
down like I was stomping on bubble wrap. Crunch. Crunch. Crunch.
Alaska was holding a burning green candle in her hand
upside down, dripping the wax onto a larger, homemade
volcano that looked a bit like a Technicolor middleschool-science-project volcano.
"Don't burn yourself,"I said as theflamecrept up toward
her hand.
"Night falls fast. Today is in the past," she said without
looking up.
"Wait, I'veread that before. What is that?"Iasked.
With her free hand, she grabbed a book and tossed it
toward me. It landed at my feet. "Poem,"shesaid. "Edna
St. Vincent Millay.
You'veread that?I'mstunned."
"Oh, I read her biography! Didn't have her last words in
it, though. I was a little bitter. All I remember is that she
had alot ofsex."
"I know. She's my hero,"Alaska said without a trace of
irony. I laughed, butshe didn't notice. "Does itseematall
odd to you that you enjoy biographies of great writers a
lotmorethan you enjoy theiractualwriting?"
"Nope!"Iannounced. "Just becausetheywereinteresting
people doesn't mean I care to hear their musings on
nighttime."
"It'sabout depression, dumb-ass."
"Oooooh, really? Well, jeez, then it's brilliant," I
answered.
She sighed. "All right. The snow may be falling in the winter of my discontent, but at least I've got sarcastic
company. Sit down, will ya?"
I sat down next to her with my legs crossed and our
knees touching. She pulled aclear plastic crate filled with
dozens of candles out from underneath her bed. She
looked at it for a moment, then handed me a white one
and alighter.
We spent all morning burning candles—well, and
We spent all morning burning candles—well, and
occasionally lighting cigarettes off the burning candles
after we stuffed a towel into the crack at the bottomof
her door. Over the course of two hours, we added a full
foot to thesummit of her polychromecandle volcano.
"Mount St. Helens on acid,"shesaid
At 12:30, after two hours of me begging for a ride to McDonald's, Alaska decided it was time for lunch. As we began to walk to the student parking lot, I saw a
strange car. A small green car. A hatchback. I've seen
that car, I thought. Where have I seen the car? And
then the
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 37 of 88
Coloneljumped outand ran to meet us.
Rather than, like, I don't know, "hello" or something, the Colonel began, "I have been instructed to invite you to Thanksgiving dinnerat ChezMartin."
Alaska whispered into my ear, and then I laughed and
said, "I have been instructed to accept your invitation."
So we walked over to the Eagle's house, told him we were going to eat turkey trailer-park style, and sped
away in the hatchback.
The Colonelexplained it to us on the two-hour car ride
south. I was crammed into the backseat because Alaska
had called shotgun. She usually drove, but when she
didn't, she was shotgun-calling queen of the world. The Colonel's mother heard that we were on campus and
couldn't bear the thought of leaving us familyless for Thanksgiving. The Colonel didn't seem too keen on the whole idea—"I'm going to have to sleep in a tent," he
whole idea—"I'm going to have to sleep in a tent," he
said,and I laughed.
Except it turns out he did have to sleep in a tent, a nice
four-person green outfit shaped like halfan egg, but stilla
tent. The Colonel's momlived in a trailer, as in the kind
of thing you might see attached to a large pickup truck,
except this particular one was old and falling apart on its
cinder blocks, and probably couldn't have been hooked
up to a truck without disintegrating. It wasn't even a
particularly big trailer. I could just barely stand up to my
full height without scraping the ceiling. Now I understood why the Colonelwas short—hecouldn'tafford to be any
taller.
The place was really one long room, with a full-size bed
in the front, a kitchenette, and a living area in the back with a TV and a small bathroom—so small that in order
to takeashower, you prettymuch had to sit on thetoilet.
"It ain't much," the Colonel's mom("That's Dolores, not Miss Martin") told us. "But y'alls a-gonna have a turkey
the size o' the kitchen." She laughed. The Colonel
ushered us out of the trailer immediately after our brief
tour, and we walked through the neighborhood, a series
oftrailersand mobile homes on dirt roads.
"Well, now you get why I hate rich people."And I did. I
couldn't fathomhow the Colonel grew up in such a small
place. Theentiretrailer was smaller than our dormroom.
I didn't know what to say to him, how to make himfeel
lessembarrassed.
"I'm sorry if it makes you uncomfortable," he said. "I
knowit's probably foreign."
"Not to me,"Alaska piped up.
"Well, you don't livein atrailer,"hetold her.
"Poor is poor."
"I suppose,"the Colonelsaid.
Alaska decided to go help Dolores with dinner. She said
that it was sexist to leave the cooking to the women, but
better to have good sexist food than crappy boyprepared food. So the Coloneland I sat on the pull-out
couch in the living room, playing video games and talking
aboutschool.
"I finished my religion paper. But I have to type it up on
your computer when we get back. I think I'mready for
finals, which is good, since we have an ank-pray to anplay."
"Your momdoesn't knowpigLatin?"I smirked.
"Not ifI talk fast. Christ, be quiet."
Thefood—fried okra, steamed corn on the cob, and pot
roast that was so tender it fell right off the plastic fork—
convinced methat Dolores wasan even bettercook than Maureen. Culver Creek's okra had less grease, more
crunch. Dolores was also the funniest momI'd ever met. When Alaska asked her what she did for work, she
smiled and said, "I'm a culnary engineeyer. That's a
short-ordercook at the Waffle Houseto y'all."
"Best Waffle House in Alabama." The Colonel smiled,
and then I realized, he wasn'tembarrassed of his momat
all. He was just scared that we would act like
condescending boarding-school snobs. I'd always found
the Colonel's I-hate-the-rich routine a little overwrought
until I saw himwith his mom. He was the same Colonel,
but in a totally different context. It made me hope that
one day, Icould meet Alaska's family, too.
Dolores insisted thatAlaskaand I sharethe bed, and she
slept on the pull-out whilethe Colonelwas out in his tent.
I worried he would getcold, but frankly I wasn'tabout to
give up my bed withAlaska. We had separate blankets,
and there were never fewer than threelayers between us,
but the possibilities keptme up halfthe night.
forty-six days before
best thanksgiving food I'd ever had. No crappy
cranberry sauce. Just huge slabs of moist white meat,
corn, green beans cooked in enough bacon fat to make
them taste like they weren't good for you, biscuits with
gravy, pumpkin pie for dessert, and a glass of red wine
foreach of us.
"I believe,"Dolores said, "that yer s'posed to drink white with turkey, but—now I don't know 'bout y'all—but I
don'ts'poseI giveashit."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 38 of 88
Welaughed and drank our wine, and then after the meal, we each listed our gratitudes. My family always did that
before the meal, and we all just rushed through it to get
to the food. So the four of us sat around the table and
shared our blessings. I was thankfulfor the fine food and
thefinecompany, for having a home on Thanksgiving. "A
trailer,at least,"Dolores joked.
"Okay, my turn,"Alaskasaid. "I'mgratefulfor having just
had my best Thanksgiving in a decade."
Then the Colonel said, "I'mjust grateful for you, Mom,"
and Dolores laughed and said, "That dog won't hunt,
and Dolores laughed and said, "That dog won't hunt,
boy."
I didn't exactly know what that phrase meant, but
apparently it meant, "That was inadequate," becausethen
the Colonelexpanded his list to acknowledgethat he was
grateful to be "the smartest human being in this trailer
park,"and Dolores laughed and said, "Good enough."
And Dolores? She was grateful that her phone was back
on, that her boy was home, thatAlaska helped her cook
and that I had kept the Colonel out of her hair, that her
job was steady and her coworkers were nice, that she
had a placeto sleep and a boywho loved her.
I sat in the back of the hatchback on the drive home—
and that is how I thought of it: home—and fellasleep to
the highway's monotonous lullaby.
forty-four days before
"coosa liquors' entire business model is built around
selling cigarettes to minors and alcohol to adults."Alaska
looked at me with disconcerting frequency when she
drove, particularly since we were winding through a
narrow, hilly highway south of school, headed to the
aforementioned Coosa Liquors. It was Saturday, our last
day of real vacation. "Which is great, if all you need is
cigarettes. But we need booze.And they card for booze. And my ID blows. But I'll flirt my way through." She made a sudden and unsignaled left turn, pulling onto a
road that dropped precipitously down a hillwith fields on
either side,and she gripped thesteeringwheeltightas we
accelerated, and she waited until the last possible moment to brake, just before we reached the bottomof
the hill. There stood a plywood gas station that no longer
sold gas with a faded sign bolted to the roof: COOSA
LIQUORS: WE CATER TO YOUR SPIRITUAL NEEDS.
NEEDS.
Alaska went in alone and walked out the door five minutes later weighed down by two paper bags filled with contraband: three cartons of cigarettes, five bottles
ofwine, and afifth of vodkafor the Colonel. On the way
home, Alaskasaid, "You like knock-knock jokes?"
"Knock-knock jokes?"Iasked. "Youmean like, 'Knock
knock..."
"Who's there?"replied Alaska.
"Who."
"Who Who?"
"Whatare you,an owl?"I finished. Lame.
"That was brilliant,"said Alaska. "I have one. You start."
"Okay. Knock knock."
"Who's there?"said Alaska.
I looked at her blankly.Abouta minutelater, I got it, and
laughed.
"My mom told me that joke when I was six. It's still
funny."
So I could not have been more surprised when she
showed up sobbing at Room43 just as I was putting the
finishing touches on my final paper for English. She sat
down on the couch, her every exhalation a mix of whimperand scream.
"I'm sorry," she said, heaving. Snot was dribbling down
herchin.
"What's wrong?"Iasked. She picked up a Kleenex from
the COFFEE TABLE and wiped at her face.
"I don't..." she started, and then a sob came like a
tsunami, her cry so loud and childlike that it scared me,
and I got up, sat down next her, and put my armaround
her. She turned away, pushing her head into the foamof
the couch. "I don't understand why I screw everything
up,"
shesaid.
"What, like withMarya? Maybe youwerejustscared."
"Scared isn'ta good excuse!"sheshouted into thecouch.
"Scared is theexcuseeveryone hasalways used!"I didn't
knowwho
"everyone"was, or when "always"was, and as much as I wanted to understand her ambiguities, the slyness was
growing annoying.
"Why are you upsetabout this now?"
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 39 of 88
"It's not just that. It'severything. But I told the Colonel in
the car." She sniffled but seemed done with the sobs.
"While you were sleeping in the back. And he said he'd
never let me out of his sight during pranks. That he
couldn't trust me on my own. And I don't blame him. I
don'teven trustme."
"It took guts to tell him,"I said.
"I have guts, just not when itcounts. Will you—um,"and
"I have guts, just not when itcounts. Will you—um,"and
she sat up straight and then moved toward me, and I
raised my armas she collapsed into my skinny chest and
cried. I felt bad for her, but she'd done it to herself. She
didn't haveto rat.
"I don't want to upset you, but maybe you just need to
tell us all why you told on Marya. Were you scared of
going home or something?"
She pulled away fromme and gave me a Look ofDoom
that would have madethe Eagle proud, and I felt likeshe
hated me or hated my question or both, and then she
looked away, out the window, toward the soccer field,
and said, "There's no home."
"Well, you have a family," I backpedaled. She'd talked
to me about her momjust that morning. How could the
girl who told that joke three hours before become a
sobbingmess?
Still staring at me, she said, "I try not to be scared, you
know. But I stillruin everything. I stillfuck up."
"Okay,"I told her. "It's okay."I didn't even know what
she was talking about anymore. One vague notion after
another.
"Don't you knowwho you love, Pudge?You lovethe girl who makes you laugh and shows you porn and drinks wine with you. You don't lovethecrazy, sullen bitch."
And there was something to that, truth betold.
Christmas
we all went home for Christmas break—even
purportedly homeless Alaska.
I got a nice watch and a new wallet—"grown-up gifts,"
I got a nice watch and a new wallet—"grown-up gifts," my dad called them. But mostly I just studied for those
two weeks. Christmas vacation wasn't really a vacation,
on account of how it was our last chance to study for
exams, which started the day after we got back. I
focused on precalc and biology, the two classes that most deeply threatened my goal ofa 3.4 GPA. I wish I
could say I was in it for the thrill of learning, but mostly I was in it for thethrill of getting into a worthwhilecollege.
So, yeah, I spent a lot ofmy time at home studyingmath
and memorizing French vocab, just like I had before Culver Creek. Really, being at home for two weeks was
just like my entire life before Culver Creek, except my
parents were more emotional. They talked very little
about their trip to London. I think they felt guilty. That'sa
funny thing about parents. Even though I pretty much
stayed at the Creek over Thanksgiving because I wanted
to, my parents stillfelt guilty. It's niceto have people who willfeel guilty for you, although Icould havelived without my mom crying during every single family dinner. She would say, "I'ma bad mother,"and my dad and I would
immediately reply,
"No, you're not."
Even my dad, who is affectionate but not, like,
sentimental, randomly, while we were watching The
Simpsons, said he missed me. I said I missed him, too,
and I did. Sort of. They're such nice people. We went to movies and played card games, and I told them the
stories I could tell without horrifying them, and they
listened. My dad, who sold real estate for a living but
read more books than anyone I knew, talked with me
about the books I was reading for English class, and my mom insisted that I sit with her in the kitchen and learn
how to make simple dishes—macaroni, scrambled eggs —now that I was "living on my own."Never mind that I
—now that I was "living on my own."Never mind that I
didn't have, or want, a kitchen. Never mind that I didn't
likeeggs or macaroniand cheese. ByNewYear's Day, I
could makethemanyway.
When I left, they both cried, my mom explaining that it was just empty-nest syndrome, that they were just so
proud of me, that they loved me so much. That put a
lump in my throat, and I didn't care about Thanksgiving
anymore. I had afamily.
eight days before
Alaska walked in on the first day back fromChristmas
break and sat beside the Colonel on the couch. The Colonelwas hard at work, breaking aland-speed record
on the PlayStation.
She didn't say she missed us, or that she was glad to see
us. She just looked at the couch and said, "You really
need a newcouch."
"Please don't address me when I'mracing," the Colonel
said.
"God. Does JeffGordon haveto put up with this shit?"
"I've gotan idea,"shesaid. "It's great. What we need isa
pre-prank thatcoincides with an attack onKevin and his minions,"shesaid.
I was sitting on the bed, reading the textbook in
preparation for myAmerican history examthe next day.
"Apre-prank?"Iasked.
"A prank designed to lull the administration into a false
sense ofsecurity,"the Colonelanswered, annoyed by the
distraction. "After the pre-prank, the Eagle will think the
juniorclass has doneits prank and won't be waiting for it
juniorclass has doneits prank and won't be waiting for it when itactually comes."Every year, thejuniorand senior
classes pulled off a prank at some point in the year—
usually something lame, like Roman candles in the dorm
circleat fivein the morning on a Sunday.
"Is therealwaysa pre-prank?"Iasked.
"No, you idiot,"the Colonelsaid. "If there was always a
pre-prank, then the Eagle would expect two pranks. The
last time a pre-prank was used—hmm. Oh, right: 1987. When the pre-prank was cutting off electricity to
campus, and then the actual prank was putting five
hundred
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 40 of 88
live crickets in the heating ducts of the classrooms.
Sometimes you can still hear thechirping."
"Your rote memorization is, like, so impressive,"I said.
"You guys are like an old married couple." Alaska
smiled. "In acreepyway."
"You don't know the half of it," the Colonel said. "You
should seethis kid try to crawlinto bed withmeat night."
"Hey!"
"Let's get on subject!" Alaska said. "Pre-prank. This weekend, sincethere'sa newmoon. We're staying at the
barn. You, me, the Colonel, Takumi, and, as a special
gift to you, Pudge, Lara Buterskaya."
"The Lara ButerskayaI puked on?"
"She's just shy. She still likes you." Alaska laughed.
"She's just shy. She still likes you." Alaska laughed.
"Pukingmade you look—vulnerable."
"Very perky boobs,"the Colonelsaid. "Are you bringing Takumifor me?"
"You need to besinglefora while."
"Trueenough,"the Colonelsaid.
"Just spend a few more months playing video games,"
shesaid. "That hand-eyecoordinationwillcomein handy when you get to third base."
"Gosh, I haven't heard the base systemin so long, I think
I've forgotten third base," the Colonel responded. "I would roll my eyes at you, but I can't afford to look
away fromthescreen."
"French, Feel, Finger, Fuck. It's like you skipped third
grade,"Alaskasaid.
"I did skip third grade,"the Colonelanswered.
"So,"I said, "what's our pre-prank?"
"The Colonel and I will work that out. No need to get
you into trouble—yet."
"Oh. Okay. Um, I'mgonna go foracigarette, then."
I left. It wasn't thefirst timeAlaska had left me out ofthe
loop, certainly, but after we'd been together so much
over Thanksgiving, it seemed ridiculous to plan the prank with the Colonel but without me. Whose T-shirts were wet with her tears? Mine. Who'd listened to her read Vonnegut? Me. Who'd been the butt of the world's worst knock-knock joke? Me. I walked to the Sunny Konvenience Kiosk across from school and smoked. This never happened to me in Florida, this oh-so-high-
This never happened to me in Florida, this oh-so-highschool angst about who likes whom more, and I hated myself for letting it happen now. You don't haveto care
about her, I told myself. Screw her.
four days before
the colonel wouldn't tell me a word about the preprank, except that it was to be called Barn Night, and
that when I packed, I should pack for two days.
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday were torture. The Colonel was always with Alaska, and I was never
invited. So I spent an inordinate amount of time studying
for finals, which helped my GPA considerably. And I
finally finished my religion paper.
My answer to the question was straightforward enough,
really. Most Christians and Muslims believe in a heaven
and a hell, though there's a lot of disagreement within
both religions over what, exactly, will get you into one
afterlife or the other. Buddhists are more complicated—
because of the Buddha's doctrine of anatta, which
basically says that people don't have eternal souls.
Instead, they have a bundle ofenergy, and that bundle of
energy is transitory, migrating fromone body to another,
reincarnating endlessly until it eventually reaches
enlightenment.
I never liked writing concluding paragraphs to papers—
where you just repeat what you've already said with
phrases likeIn summation, and To conclude. I didn't
do that—instead I talked about why I thought it was an
important question. People, I thought, wanted security. They couldn't bear the idea of death being a big black
nothing, couldn't bear the thought of their loved ones not
existing, and couldn't even imagine themselves not
existing. I finally decided that people believed in an
existing. I finally decided that people believed in an
afterlife becausethey couldn't bear not to.
three days before
on Friday, after a surprisingly successful precalc exam
that brought my first set ofCulver Creek finals to aclose,
I packed clothes ("Think New
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 41 of 88
York trendy," the Colonel advised. "Think black. Think
sensible. Comfortable, but warm.") and my sleeping bag
into a backpack, and we picked up Takumi in his room
and walked to the Eagle's house. The Eagle was wearing
his only outfit, and I wondered whether he just had thirty
identical white button-down shirts and thirty identical
black ties in his closet. I pictured him waking up in the morning, staring at his closet, and thinking, Hmm...hmm...how about a white shirt and a black
tie? Talk abouta guywho could usea wife.
"I'mtaking Miles and Takumi home for the weekend to NewHope,"the Coloneltold him.
"Miles liked his taste ofNewHopethatmuch?"the Eagle
asked me.
"Yee haw! There's a gonna be a hoedown at the trailer
park!" the Colonel said. He could actually have a
Southern accent when he wanted to, although like most
everyone at Culver Creek, he didn't usually speak with
one.
"Hold on one moment while I call your mom,"the Eagle
said to the Colonel.
Takumi looked at me with poorly disguised panic, and I
felt lunch—fried chicken—rising in my stomach. But the Coloneljustsmiled.
"Surething."
"Chip and Miles and Takumi will be at your house this weekend?...Yes, ma'am.... Ha!...Okay. Bye now." The Eagle looked upat the Colonel. "Your mom is a wonderfulwoman."The Eaglesmiled.
"You're tellin' me." The Colonel grinned. "See you on
Sunday."
As we walked toward the gym parking lot, the Colonel
said, "I called her yesterday and asked her to cover for me,and she didn'teven ask why.
She just said, 'I sure trust you, son,' and hot damn she
does."Once out ofsight of the Eagle's house, we took a
sharp right into the woods.
We walked on the dirt road over the bridge and back to
the school's barn, a dilapidated leak-prone structure that
looked more like a long-abandoned log cabin than a
barn. They still stored hay there, although I don't know
what for. It wasn't like we had an equestrian programor
anything. The Colonel, Takumi, and I got there first,
setting up our sleeping bags on thesoftest bales of hay. It was 6:30.
Alaska came shortly after, having told the Eagle she was
spending the weekend with Jake. The Eagle didn'tcheck
that story, because Alaska spent at least one weekend
there every month, and he knew that her parents never
cared. Lara showed up halfan hour later. She'd told the Eagle that she was driving to Atlanta to see an old friend
fromRomania. The Eagle called Lara's parents to make
fromRomania. The Eagle called Lara's parents to make
sure that they knew she was spending a weekend off
campus,and they didn'tmind.
"They trustme."Shesmiled.
"You don't sound like you have an accent sometimes,"I
said, whichwas pretty stupid, buta darn sight better than
throwing up on her.
"Eet's only soft i's."
"No soft i's inRussian?"Iasked.
"Romanian,"she corrected me. Turns out Romanian is a
language. Who knew? My cultural sensitivity quotient was going to haveto drastically increaseifI was going to
shareasleeping bagwithLaraanytimesoon.
Everybody was sitting on sleeping bags, Alaska smoking with flagrant disregard for the overwhelming flammability
of the structure, when the Colonel pulled out a single
piece ofcomputer paperand read fromit.
"The point of this evening's festivities is to prove once
and for all that we are to pranking what the Weekday Warriorsareto sucking.
But we'll also have the opportunity to make life
unpleasant for the Eagle, which is always a welcome
pleasure. And so," he said, pausing as if for a drumroll,
"wefight tonighta battle on threefronts:
"Front One: The pre-prank: We will, as it were, light a
fire under the Eagle'sass.
"Front Two: Operation Baldy: Wherein Lara flies solo in
a retaliatory mission so elegant and cruel that it could
only have been the brainchild of, well, me."
"Hey!"Alaskainterrupted. "It was myidea."
"Okay, fine. It was Alaska's idea." He laughed. "And
finally, Front Three: The Progress Reports: We're going
to hack into the faculty computer network and use their
grading database to send out letters to Kevin et al.'s
families saying that they arefailing some oftheirclasses."
"Weare definitely going to getexpelled,"I said.
"I hope you didn't bring the Asian kid along thinking he's
acomputer genius. BecauseIamnot,"Takumisaid.
"We're not going to get expelled and I'm the computer
genius. The rest of you are muscle and distraction. We won't get expelled even if we get caught because there
are no expellable offenses here—well, except for the five
bottles of StrawberryHill inAlaska's backpack, and that will be well hidden. We're just, you know, wreaking a
little havoc."
The plan was laid out, and it left no roomfor error. The Colonel relied so heavily on perfect synchronicity that if
one of us messed up even slightly, the endeavor would
collapseentirely.
He had printed up individual itineraries for each of us,
including times exact to the second. Our watches
synchronized, our clothes black, our backpacks on, our
breath visible in the cold, our minds filled with the minute
details of the plan, our hearts racing, we walked out of
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 42 of 88
the barn together once it was completely dark, around
seven. The five of us walking confidently in a row, I'd
never felt cooler. The Great Perhaps was upon us, and we wereinvincible. The planmay have had faults, but we
did not.
After five minutes, we split up to go to our destinations. I
stuck withTakumi. We werethe distraction.
"We'rethefuckingMarines,"hesaid.
"First to fight. First to die,"Iagreed nervously.
"Hell yes."
Hestopped and opened his bag.
"Not here, dude,"I said. "We haveto go to the Eagle's."
"I know. I know. Just—hold on." He pulled out a thick
headband. It was brown, with a plush fox head on the
front. He put it on his head.
I laughed. "What the hellis that?"
"It's my fox hat."
"Your fox hat?"
"Yeah, Pudge. My fox hat."
"Why are youwearing your fox hat?" Iasked.
"Because no onecan catch the motherfucking fox."
Two minutes later, we were crouched behind the trees
fifty feet fromthe Eagle's back door. My heart thumped
likeatechno drumbeat.
"Thirty seconds," Takumi whispered, and I felt the same
spooked nervousness that I had felt that first night with Alaska when she grabbed my hand and whispered run
Alaska when she grabbed my hand and whispered run
run run run run. But I stayed put.
I thought:We are not closeenough.
I thought:He will not hear it.
I thought:He will hear it and be out so fast that we will have no chance.
I thought:Twenty seconds. I was breathing hard and
fast.
"Hey, Pudge," Takumi whispered, "you can do this,
dude. It's just running."
"Right."Just running. My knees are good. My lungs
arefair. It's just running.
"Five," hesaid. "Four. Three. Two. One. Light it. Light it. Light it."
It lit with a sizzle that reminded me ofevery July Fourth with my family. We stood still for a nanosecond, staring
at the fuse, making sure it was lit. And now, I thought. Now. Run run run run run. But my body didn't move
until I heard Takumi shout-whisper, "Go go go fucking
go."
And we went.
Threeseconds later, a huge burst of pops. It sounded, to me, like the automatic gunfire in Decapitation, except
louder. We were twenty steps away already, and I
thoughtmy eardrums would burst.
I thought:Well, he willcertainly hear it.
We ran past the soccer field and into the woods, running
uphilland with only the vaguest sense of direction. In the
uphilland with only the vaguest sense of direction. In the
dark, fallen branches and moss-covered rocks appeared
at the last possible second, and I slipped and fell
repeatedly and worried that the Eagle would catch up,
but I just kept getting up and running beside Takumi,
away fromthe classrooms and the dorm circle. We ran
like we had golden shoes. I ran likeacheetah—well, like
a cheetah that smoked too much. And then, after
precisely one minute of running, Takumi stopped and
ripped open his backpack.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 43 of 88
My turn to count down. Staring at my watch. Terrified. By now, he was surely out. He was surely running. I wondered if he was fast.
He was old, but he'd be mad.
"Fivefour threetwo one,"and thesizzle. We didn't pause
that time, just ran, stillwest. Breath heaving. I wondered
if I could do this for thirty minutes. The firecrackers
exploded.
The pops ended, and a voice cried out, "STOP RIGHT NOW!" But we did not stop. Stopping was not in the
plan.
"I'm the motherfucking fox," Takumi whispered, both to
himselfand to me. "No onecan catch thefox."
A minute later, I was on the ground. Takumi counted
down. Thefuselit. Weran.
But it wasa dud. We had prepared for one dud, bringing
an extra string of firecrackers. Another, though, would
an extra string of firecrackers. Another, though, would
cost the Coloneland Alaska a minute. Takumicrouched
down on the ground, lit the fuse, and ran. The popping
started. Thefireworks bangbangbanged in sync withmy
heartbeat.
When the firecrackers finished, I heard, "STOPOR I'LL CALL THE POLICE!" And though the voice was
distant, I could feel his Look of Doombearing down on me.
"The pigs can't stop the fox; I'mtoo quick," Takumisaid
to himself. "Ican rhyme whileI run; I'mthatslick."
The Colonel warned us about the police threat, told us
not to worry. The Eagle didn't like to bring the police to
campus. Bad publicity.
So we ran. Over and under and through all manner of
trees and bushes and branches. We fell. We got up. We
ran. If he couldn't follow us with the firecrackers, he
could sure as hell follow the sound of our whispered
shits as we tripped over dead logs and fell into briar
bushes.
One minute. I knelt down, lit thefuse, ran. Bang.
Thenweturned north, thinkingwe'd gotten past the lake. This was key to the plan. The farther we got while still
staying on campus, thefarther the Eagle would followus. The farther he followed us, the farther he would be from
the classrooms, where the Colonel and Alaska were working their magic. And then we planned to loop back
near the classrooms and swing east along the creek until we came to the bridge over our Smoking Hole, where we would rejoin the road and walk back to the barn,
triumphant.
But here's thething:We madeaslighterror in navigation.
We weren't past the lake; instead we were staring at a
field and then thelake.
Too close to the classrooms to run anywhere but along
the lakefront, I looked over at Takumi, who was running with me stride for stride, and he just said, "Drop one
now."
So I dropped down, lit the fuse, and we ran. We were
running through a clearing now, and if the Eagle was
behind us, hecould see us.
We got to the south corner of the lake and started
running along the shore. The lake wasn't all that big—
maybe a quarter mile long, so we didn't have far to go when I sawit.
Theswan.
Swimming toward us like a swan possessed. Wings
flapping furiously as itcame, and then it was on theshore
in front of us, making a noise that sounded like nothing
elsein this world, likeall the worst parts ofa dying rabbit
plus all the worst parts of a crying baby, and there was
no other way, so we just ran. I hit the swan at a full run
and felt it bite into my ass. And then I was runningwith a
noticeable limp, because my ass was on fire, and I
thought to myself, What the hell is in swan saliva that
burns so badly?
Thetwenty-third stringwasa dud, costing us one minute. At that point, I wanted a minute. I was dying. The
burning sensation in my left buttock had dulled to an
intense aching, magnified each time I landed on my left
leg, so I was running like an injured gazelle trying to
evade a pride of lions. Our speed, needless to say, had
slowed considerably. We hadn't heard the Eagle since we got across the lake, but I didn't think he had turned
around. He was trying to lull us into complacency, but it would not work. Tonight, we wereinvincible.
Exhausted, we stopped with three strings left and hoped we'd given the Colonel enough time. We ran for a few more minutes, until we found the bank of the creek. It was so dark and so still that the tiny stream of water
seemed to roar, but I could still hear our hard, fast
breaths as we collapsed on wet clay and pebbles beside
the creek. Only when we stopped did I look at Takumi. His face and arms were scratched, the fox head now
directly over his left ear. Looking at my own arms, I
noticed blood dripping from the deeper cuts. There were, I remembered now, some wicked briar patches,
but I was feeling no pain.
Takumi picked thorns out of his leg. "The fox is fucking
tired,"hesaid,and laughed.
"Theswan bitmy ass,"I told him.
"I saw." He smiled. "Is it bleeding?" I reached my hand
into my pants to check. No blood, so I smoked to
celebrate.
"Mission accomplished,"I said.
"Pudge, my friend, weareindefuckingstructible."
We couldn't figure out where we were, because the
creek doubles back so many times through the campus,
so we followed the creek for about ten minutes, figuring we walked halfas fastas weran,and then turned left.
"Left, you think?"Takumiasked.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 44 of 88
"I'mpretty lost,"I said.
"The fox is pointing left. So left."And, sure enough, the
fox took us right back to the barn.
"You're okay!" Lara said as we walked up. "I was worried. I saw the Eagle run out of hees house. He was wearing pajamas. Hesurelooked mad."
I said, "Well, if he was mad then, I wouldn't want to see
himnow."
"What took you so long?"sheasked me.
"Wetook thelongway home,"Takumisaid. "Plus Pudge
is walking like an old lady with hemorrhoids 'cause the
swan bit him on the ass. Where's Alaska and the Colonel?"
"I don't know,"Larasaid, and thenwe heard footsteps in
the distance, mutters and cracking branches. In a flash, Takumi grabbed our sleeping bags and backpacks and
hid thembehind bales of hay. Thethree of us ran through
the back of the barn and into the waist-high grass, and
lay down. He tracked us back to the barn, I thought. Wefucked everything up.
But then I heard the Colonel's voice, distinct and very
annoyed, saying, "Because it narrows the list of possible
suspects by twenty-three! Why couldn't you just follow
the plan? Christ, whereiseverybody?"
We walked back to the barn, a bit sheepish fromhaving
overreacted. The Colonelsat down on a bale of hay, his
elbows on his knees, his head bowed, his palms against
his forehead. Thinking.
"Well, we haven't been caught yet, anyway. Okay, first,"
he said without looking up, "tell me everything else went
allright. Lara?"
Shestarted talking. "Yes. Good."
"Can I havesome more detail, please?"
"I deed like your paper said. I stayed behind the Eagle's
house until I saw heemrun after Miles and Takumi, and
then I ran behind the dorms.And then I went through the weendow eento Keveen's room. Then I put the stuffeen
the gell and the conditioner, and then I deed the same
thing een Jeffand Longwell's room."
"Thestuff?"Iasked.
"Undiluted industrial-strength blue number-five hair dye," Alaska said. "Which I bought with your cigarette money. Apply it to wet hair,and it won't wash out for months."
"We dyed their hair blue?"
"Well, technically,"the Colonelsaid, stillspeaking into his
lap,
"they're going to dye their own hair blue. But we have
certainlymadeiteasier for them. I knowyou and Takumi
did all right, because we're here and you're here, so you
did your job. And the good news is that the three
assholes who had the gall to prank us have progress
reportscoming saying that they arefailing threeclasses."
"Uh-oh. What's the bad news?"Laraasked.
"Oh, c'mon,"Alaska said. "The other good news is that while the Colonelwas worried he'd heard something and
ran into the woods, I saw to it that twenty other
ran into the woods, I saw to it that twenty other WeekdayWarriors also have progress reportscoming. I
printed out reports for all of them, stuffed them into metered school envelopes, and then put then in the mailbox." She turned to the Colonel. "You were sure
gone a long time," she said. "The wittle Colonel: so
scared of getting expelled."
The Colonelstood up, towering over therest of usas we
sat. "That is not good news! That was not in the plan! That means there are twenty-three people who the Eagle
can eliminate as suspects. Twenty-three people who might figure out it was usand rat!"
"Ifthat happens,"Alaskasaid very seriously, "I'll takethe
fall."
"Right." The Colonel sighed. "Like you took the fall for
Pauland Marya. You'llsay that while you were traipsing
through the woods lighting firecrackers you were
simultaneously hacking into the faculty network and
printing out false progress reports on schoolstationery?
BecauseI'msurethat willflywith the Eagle!"
"Relax, dude," Takumi said. "First off, we're not gonna
get caught. Second off, if we do, I'll take the fall with Alaska. You've got more to lose than any of us." The Colonel just nodded. It was an undeniable fact: The Colonelwould have no chanceatascholarship to a good
schoolif he gotexpelled fromthe Creek.
Knowing that nothing cheered up the Colonel like
acknowledging his brilliance, I asked, "So how'd you
hack the network?"
"Iclimbed in the windowofDr. Hyde's office, booted up
his computer, and I typed in his password," he said,
smiling.
"You guessed it?"
"No. On Tuesday I went into his office and asked himto
print me a copy of the recommended reading list. And
then I watched him
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 45 of 88
typethe password:J3ckylnhyd3."
"Well, shit,"Takumisaid. "Icould have donethat."
"Sure, but then you wouldn't have gotten to wear that
sexy hat," the Colonel said, laughing. Takumi took the
headband offand put it in his bag.
"Kevin is going to be pissed about his hair,"I said.
"Yeah, well, I'm really pissed about my waterlogged
library. Kevin is a blowup doll,"Alaska said. "Prick us, we bleed. Prick him, he pops."
"It's true," said Takumi. "The guy is a dick. He kind of
tried to kill you,afterall."
"Yeah, I guess,"Iacknowledged.
"There are a lot of people here like that," Alaska went
on, still fuming. "You know? Fucking blowup-doll rich
kids."
Buteven thoughKevin had sort oftried to killmeand all,
he really didn't seem worth hating. Hating the cool kids
takesan awful lot ofenergy, and I'd given up on ita long
time ago. For me, the prank was just a response to a
previous prank, just a golden opportunity to, as the
Colonel said, wreak a little havoc. But to Alaska, it
seemed to besomething else, somethingmore.
I wanted to ask her about it, but she lay back down
behind the piles of hay, invisible again. Alaska was done
talking, and when she was done talking, that was it. We
didn't coax her out for two hours, until the Colonel
unscrewed a bottle ofwine. We passed around the bottle
tillIcould feelit inmy stomach, sourand warm.
I wanted to like booze more than I actually did (which is more or less the precise opposite of how I felt about Alaska). But that night, the booze felt great, as the warmth of the wine in my stomach spread through my
body. I didn't like feeling stupid or out of control, but I
liked the way it made everything (laughing, crying, peeing
in front of your friends) easier. Why did we drink? For me, it was just fun, particularly since we were risking
expulsion. The nice thing about the constant threat of
expulsion at Culver Creek is that it lends excitement to
everymoment ofillicit pleasure. The bad thing, ofcourse,
is that thereisalways the possibility ofactualexpulsion.
two days before
I WOKEUPEARLYthe next morning, my lips dry and my breath visible in the crisp air. Takumi had brought a
camp stove in his backpack, and the Colonel was
huddled over it, heating instant coffee. The sun shone
bright but could not combat the cold, and I sat with the Colonel and sipped the coffee ("The thing about instant
coffeeis that it smells pretty good but tastes likestomach
bile," the Colonel said), and then one by one, Takumi
and Lara and Alaska woke up, and we spent the day
hiding out, but loudly. Hiding out loud.
At the barn that afternoon, Takumi decided we needed
to haveafreestyle
to haveafreestyle
contest. "You start, Pudge," Takumi said. "Colonel
Catastrophe,
you're our beat box.""Dude, Ican't rap,"I pled.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 46 of 88
"That's okay. The Colonel can't drop beats, either. Just
try and rhymealittleand then send it over to me."
With his hand cupped over his mouth, the Colonel
started to make absurd noises that sounded more like
farting than bass beats,and I, uh, rapped.
"Um, we're sittin' in the barn and the sun's goin' down / when I wasa kid at Burger King I wore a crown / dude,
Ican't rhymefor shit /
so I'llletmy boyTakumirip it."
Takumi took over without pausing. "Damn, Pudge, I'm
not sure I'm quite ready / but like Nightmare on Elm
Street's Freddy / I've always got the goods to rip shit up
/ last night I drank wine it was like hiccup hiccup / the Colonel's beats are sick like malaria / when I rock the mike the ladies suffer hysteria / I represent Japan as well
as Birmingham/ when I was a kid they called me yellow man / but Iain'tashamed a'
my skin color / and neither are the countless bitches that
callmelover."
Alaskajumped in.
"Oh shit did you just diss the feminine gender / I'll
"Oh shit did you just diss the feminine gender / I'll
pummel your ass then stick you in a blender / you think I
like Tori and Ani so I can't rhyme / but I got flow like Ghostbusters got slime / objectify women and it's fuckin'
on / you'll be dead and gonelikeancient Babylon."
Takumi picked it up again.
"Ifmy eye offends me I will pluck it out / I got props for
girls like old men got gout / oh shit now my rhyming got
allwhack / Lara help me outand pick up theslack."
Lara rhymed quietly and nervously—and with evenmore
flagrant disregard for the beat thanme. "My name's Lara
and I'mfromRomania / thees is pretty hard, um, I once
visited Albania / I love riding inAlaska's Geo / My two
best vowels in English are EO I I'm not so good weeth
the leetle i's / but they make me sound cosmopoleeteen,
right? / Oh, Takumi, I think I'm done / end thees game weeth somefun."
"I drop bombs like Hiroshima, or better yet Nagasaki / when girls hear me flow they think that I'm Rocky / to
represent my homeland I still drink sake / the kids don't
get my rhymin' so sometimes they mock me / my build
ain't small but I wouldn'tcall it stocky / then again, unlike
Pudge, I'mnot super gawky / I'mthe fuckin' fox and this
is my crew/ our freestyle's infused with funk like my gym
shoes. And we're out."
The Colonelrapped it up with freestyle beat-boxing, and we gave ourselvesaround ofapplause.
"You ripped it up, Alaska,"Takumisays, laughing.
"I do what I can to represent the ladies. Lara had my
back."
"Yeah, I deed."
"Yeah, I deed."
And then Alaska decided that although it wasn't nearly
dark yet, it was timefor us to getshitfaced.
"Two nights in arowis maybe pushing our luck,"Takumi
said as Alaska opened the wine.
"Luck is for suckers." She smiled and put the bottle to
her lips. We had saltines and a hunk of Cheddar cheese
provided by the Colonelfor dinner,and sipping the warm
pink wine out of the bottle with our cheese and saltines made for a fine dinner. And when we ran out ofcheese, well,allthe moreroomfor StrawberryHill.
"We have to slow down or I'll puke," I remarked after wefinished thefirst bottle.
"I'm sorry, Pudge. I wasn't aware that someone was
holding open your throat and pouring wine down it,"the Colonel responded, tossing me a bottle of Mountain Dew.
"It's a little charitable to call this shit wine," Takumi
cracked.
And then, as if out of nowhere, Alaska announced, "Best Day/Worst Day!"
"Huh?"Iasked.
"We are all going to puke if we just drink. So we'llslow
it downwith a drinking game. Best Day/Worst Day."
"Never heard ofit,"the Colonelsaid.
"'Cause I just made it up." She smiled. She lay on her
side across two bales of hay, the afternoon light
brightening the green in her eyes, her tan skin the last memory of fall. With her mouth half open, it occurred to
memory of fall. With her mouth half open, it occurred to methatshe mustalready be drunk as I noticed thefar-off
look in her eyes. The thousand-yard stare of
intoxication, I thought,and as I watched her with an idle
fascination, it occurred to me that, yeah, I was a little
drunk, too.
"Fun! Whataretherules?"Laraasked.
"Everybody tells the story of their best day. The best
storyteller doesn't haveto drink. Then everybody tells the
story of their worst day, and the best storyteller doesn't
have to drink. Then we keep going, second best day,
second worst day, until one of y'all quits."
"Howdo you knowit'll be one of us?"Takumiasked.
"'CauseI'mthe best drinker and the best storyteller,"she
answered. Hard to disagree with that logic. "You start,
Pudge. Best day of your life."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 47 of 88
"Urn. Can I takea minuteto think of one?"
"Couldn'ta been that good if you have to think about it,"
the Colonelsaid.
"Fuck you, dude."
"Touchy."
"Best day ofmy life was today,"I said. "And the story is
that I woke up next to a very pretty Hungarian girland it was cold but not too cold and I had a cup of lukewarm
instant coffee and ate Cheerios without milk and then walked through the woods withAlaskaand Takumi.
walked through the woods withAlaskaand Takumi.
We skipped stones across the creek, which sounds
dumb but it wasn't. I don't know. Likethe way the sun is
right now, with the long shadows and that kind of bright,
soft light you get when the sun isn't quite setting? That's
the light that makes everything better, everything prettier,
and today, everything just seemed to be in that light. I mean, I didn't do anything. But just sitting here, even if
I'mwatching the Colonelwhittle, or whatever. Whatever. Great day. Today. Best day ofmy life."
"You think I'mpretty?"Larasaid, and laughed, bashful. I
thought, It'd be good to make eye contact with her
now, but Icouldn't. "And I'mRomaneean!"
"That story ended up being a hell of a lot better than I
thought it would be,"Alaska said, "but I've still got you
beat."
"Bring it on, baby," I said. A breeze picked up, the tall
grass outside the barn tilting away from it, and I pulled my sleeping bag over my shoulders to staywarm.
"Best day of my life was January 9, 1997. I was eight
years old, and mymomand I went to the zoo on a class
trip. I liked the bears.
Sheliked the monkeys. Best day ever. End ofstory."
"That's it?!"the Colonelsaid. "That's the best day of your wholelife?!"
"Yup."
"I liked eet,"Larasaid. "I likethe monkeys, too."
"Lame," said the Colonel. I didn't think it was lame so much as more ofAlaska's intentional vagueness, another
much as more ofAlaska's intentional vagueness, another
example of her furthering her own mysteriousness. But
still, even though I knewit was intentional, Icouldn't help
but wonder:What's so fucking great about the zoo? But beforeIcould ask, Laraspoke.
"'Kay, my turn,"said Lara. "Eet's easy. The day I came
here. I knew Engleesh and my parents deedn't, and we
came off the airplane and my relatives were here, aunts
and uncles I had not ever seen, in the airport, and my
parents were so happy. I was twelve, and I had always
been the leetle baby, but that was the first day that my
parents needed me and treated me like a grown-up. Because they did not know the language, right? They
need me to order food and to translate tax and
immigration formsand everytheeng else, and that was the
day they stopped treating me like a keed. Also, in Romania, we were poor. And here, we're kinda reech."
Shelaughed.
"All right." Takumismiled, grabbing the bottle ofwine. "I
lose. Because the best day of my life was the day I lost my virginity. And if you think I'm going to tell you that
story, you're gonna haveto getme drunker than this."
"Not bad," the Colonel said. "That's not bad. Want to
knowmy best day?"
"That's the game, Chip,"Alaskasaid,clearly annoyed.
"Best day ofmy life hasn't happened yet. But I knowit. I
see it every day. The best day ofmy life is the day I buy my mom a huge fucking house. And not just like out in
the woods, but in the middle ofMountain Brook, with all
the Weekday Warriors' parents. With allly'all's parents. And I'mnot buying it with a mortgageeither. I'mbuying it with cash money, and I am driving my mom there, and
I'mgoing to open her side of the car door and she'll get
outand look at this house—this houseis like picket fence
outand look at this house—this houseis like picket fence
and two stories and everything, you know—and I'm
going to hand her the keys to her house and I'll say,
'Thanks.' Man, she helped fill out my application to this
place. And sheletmecome here,and that's no easy thing when you come from where we do, to let your son go
away to school. So that's the best day ofmy life."
Takumi tilted the bottle up and swallowed a few times,
then handed it to me. I drank, and so did Lara, and then Alaska put her head back and turned the bottle upside
down, quickly downing thelast quarter ofthe bottle.
As she unscrewed the next bottle, Alaska smiled at the Colonel. "You won that round. Now what's your worst
day?"
"Worst day was when my dad left. He's old—he's like
seventy now—and he was old when he married my mom, and hestill cheated on her. And she caught him,
and she got pissed, so he hit her. And then she kicked
himout, and heleft. I was here, and mymomcalled, and
she didn't tell me the whole story with the cheating and
everything and the hitting until later. She just said that he was goneand notcoming back.
And I haven't seen himsince. All that day, I kept waiting
for him to call me and explain it, but he never did. He
never called at all. I at least thought he would say goodbye or something. That was the worst day."
"Shit, you got me beatagain,"I said. "Myworst daywas
in seventh grade, whenTommyHewitt pissed onmy gym
clothes and then the gymteacher said I had to wear my
uniform or I'd fail the class. Seventh-grade gym, right? There are worse things to fail. But it was a big deal then,
and I was crying, and trying to explain to the teacher what happened, but it was so embarrassing, and he just
yelled and yelled and yelled until I put on these piss-
yelled and yelled and yelled until I put on these pisssoaked shorts and T-shirt. That was the day I stopped
caring what people did. I just never cared anymore,
about being a loser or not having friends or any of that.
So I guess it was good for me in a way, but that moment was awful. I mean, imagine me playing volleyball or whatever in pee-soaked gym clothes while Tommy Hewitt tells everyone what he did. That was the worst
day."
Lara was laughing. "I'msorry, Miles."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 48 of 88
"All good," I said. "Just tell me yours so I can laugh at
your pain,"and I smiled,and welaughed together.
"My worst day was probably the same day as my best. BecauseI lefteverytheeng. I mean,eetsounds dumb, but my childhood, too, because most twelve-year-olds do
not, you know, haveto feegure out W-2 forms."
"What'sa W-2 form?"Iasked.
"That's my point. Eet's for taxes. So. Same day."
Lara had always needed to talk for her parents, I
thought, and so maybe she never learned how to talk for
herself. And I wasn't great at talking for myself either. We had something important in common, then, a
personality quirk I didn't share with Alaska or anybody
else, although almost by definition Lara and I couldn't
express it to each other. So maybe it was just the way
the not-yet-setting sun shone against her lazy dark curls,
but at that moment, I wanted to kiss her, and we did not
need to talk in order to kiss, and the puking on her jeans
need to talk in order to kiss, and the puking on her jeans
and the months ofmutualavoidance melted away.
"Eet's your turn, Takumi."
"Worst day ofmy life," Takumisaid. "June 9, 2000. My
grandmother died in Japan. She died in a car accident,
and I was supposed to leave to go see her two days
later. I was going to spend the whole summer with her
and my grandfather, but instead I flew over for her
funeral, and the only time I really saw what she looked
like, I mean other than in pictures, wasat her funeral. She
had a Buddhist funeral, and they cremated her, but
before they did she was on this, like—well, it's not really Buddhist. I mean, religion is complicated there, so it's a
little Buddhist and a little Shinto, but y'all don't care—
point being that she was on this, like, funeral pyre or whatever. And that's the only time I ever saw her, was
just beforethey burned her up. That was the worst day."
The Colonel lit a cigarette, threw it to me, and lit one of
his own. It was eerie, that he could tell when I wanted a
cigarette. We were like an old married couple. For a moment, I thought. It's massively unwise to throw lit
cigarettes around a barn full of hay, but then the moment of caution passed, and I just made a sincere
effort not to flick ash onto any hay.
"No clear winner yet," the Colonel said. "The field is wide open. Your turn, buddy."
Alaska lay on her back, her hands locked behind her
head. She spoke softly and quickly, but the quiet day was becoming a quieter night—the bugs gone now with
thearrival ofwinter—and wecould hear herclearly.
"The day after my mom took me to the zoo where she
liked the monkeys and I liked the bears, it was a Friday.
I came home fromschool. She gave me a hug and told
I came home fromschool. She gave me a hug and told meto go do my homework inmy roomso Icould watch TV later. I went into my room, and she sat down at the
kitchen table, I guess, and then she screamed, and I ran
out, and she had fallen over. She was lying on the floor,
holding her head and jerking.And I freaked out. I should
have called 911, but I just started screaming and crying
until finally she stopped jerking, and I thought she had
fallen asleep and that whatever had hurt didn't hurt
anymore. So I just sat there on thefloor with her untilmy
dad got homean hour later,and he's screaming,
'Why didn't you call 911?' and trying to give her CPR,
but by then she was plenty dead. Aneurysm. Worst day.
I win. You drink."
And so we did.
No one talked for a minute, and then Takumi asked,
"Your dad blamed you?"
"Well, not after that first moment. But yeah. How could
he not?"
"Well, you were a little kid," Takumi argued. I was too
surprised and uncomfortable to talk, trying to fit this into what I knewabout Alaska's family. Her momtold her the
knock-knock joke—when Alaska was six. Her mom
used to smoke—but didn'tanymore, obviously.
"Yeah. I wasalittle kid. Little kidscan dial 911. They do
it all the time. Give me the wine,"she said, deadpan and
emotionless. She drank without lifting her head fromthe
hay.
"I'msorry,"Takumisaid.
"Why didn't you ever tell me?" the Colonel asked, his
voicesoft.
"It never came up." And then we stopped asking
questions. What the hell do you say?
In the long quiet that followed, as we passed around the wine and slowly became drunker, I found myselfthinking
about President William McKinley, the third American
president to be assassinated. He lived for several days
after he was shot, and toward the end, his wife started
crying and screaming, "I want to go, too! I want to go,
too!" And with his last measure of strength, McKinley
turned to her and spoke his last words: "We are all
going."
It was the central moment of Alaska's life. When she
cried and told me that she fucked everything up, I knew
what she meant now. And when she said she failed
everyone, I knewwhomshe meant. It was theeverything
and the everyone of her life, and so I could not help but
imagine it: I imagined a scrawny eight-year-old with dirty
fingers, looking down at her mother convulsing. So she
sat down with her dead-or-maybe-not mother, who I
imagine was not breathing by then but wasn't yet cold
either. And in the time between dying and death, a little Alaska sat with her mother in silence. And then through
thesilenceand my drunkenness, Icaughta glimpse of her
as she might have been. She must have come to feel so
powerless, I thought, that the one thing she might have
done—pick up the phone and callan ambulance—never
even occurred to her.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 49 of 88
There comes a time when we realize that our parents
cannot save themselves or save us, that everyone who wades through timeeventually gets dragged out to sea by
wades through timeeventually gets dragged out to sea by
the undertow—that, in short, weareall going.
So she became impulsive, scared by her inaction into
perpetual action. When the Eagle confronted her with
expulsion, maybe she blurted out Marya's name because
it was thefirst thatcameto mind, becausein that moment
she didn't want to get expelled and couldn't think past
that moment. She was scared, sure. But more
importantly, maybe she'd been scared of being paralyzed
by fearagain.
"We are all going," McKinley said to his wife, and we
sure are. There's your labyrinth of suffering. We are all
going. Find your way out ofthatmaze.
None of which I said out loud to her. Not then and not
ever. We never said another word about it. Instead, it
became just another worst day, albeit the worst of the
bunch, and as night fell fast, we continued on, drinking
and joking.
Later that night, after Alaska stuck her finger down her
throatand made herself puke in front ofall of us because
she was too drunk to walk into the woods, I lay down in my sleeping bag. Lara was lying beside me, in her bag, which was almost touchingmine. I moved my armto the
edge of my bag and pushed it so it slightly overlapped with hers. I pressed my hand against hers. I could feel it,
although there were two sleeping bags between us. My
plan, which struck me as very slick, was to pull my arm
out ofmy sleeping bag and put it into hers, and then hold
her hand. It wasa good plan, but when I tried to actually
get my armout ofthe mummy bag, I flailed around like a
fish out ofwater, and nearly dislocated my shoulder. She was laughing—and not with me, at me—but we still
didn't speak. Having passed the point of no return, I slid my hand into her sleeping bag anyway, and she stifled a
my hand into her sleeping bag anyway, and she stifled a
giggle as my fingers traced a line fromher elbow to her wrist.
"That teekles," she whispered. So much for me being
sexy.
"Sorry,"I whispered.
"No, it's a nice teekle,"she said, and held my hand. She
laced her fingers in mine and squeezed. And then she
rolled over and keessed me. I am sure that she tasted
like stale booze, but I did not notice, and I'm sure I
tasted like stale booze and cigarettes, but she didn't
notice. We were kissing.
I thought:This is good.
I thought:I am not bad at thiskissing. Not bad at all.
I thought: I am clearly the greatest kisser in the
history of the universe.
Suddenly she laughed and pulled away from me. She wiggled a hand out of her sleeping bag and wiped her
face. "You slobbered on my nose," she said, and
laughed.
I laughed, too, trying to give her the impression that my
nose-slobbering kissing style was intended to be funny.
"I'm sorry." To borrow the base system fromAlaska, I
hadn't hit morethan fivesingles inmy entirelife, so I tried
to chalk it up to inexperience. "I'ma bit newat this,"
I said.
"Eet was a nice slobbering," she said, laughed, and
kissed me again. Soon we were entirely out of our
sleeping bags, making out quietly. She lay on top of me,
and I held her small waist in my hands. I could feel her
and I held her small waist in my hands. I could feel her
breasts against my chest, and she moved slowly on top
ofme, her legs straddlingme. "You feel nice,"shesaid.
"You're beautiful,"I said, and smiled at her. In the dark, I
could make out the outline of her face and her large,
round eyes blinking down at me, her eyelashes almost
fluttering againstmy forehead.
"Could the two people who are making out please be
quiet?" the Colonel asked loudly from his sleeping bag.
"Those of us who are not making out are drunk and
tired."
"Mostly. Drunk," Alaska said slowly, as if enunciation
required greateffort.
We had almost never talked, Lara and I, and we didn't
geta chance to talk anymore because ofthe Colonel. So we kissed quietly and laughed softlywith our mouthsand
our eyes. After so much kissing that it almost started to
get boring, I whispered, "Do you want to be my
girlfriend?"And she said, "Yes please,"and smiled. We
slept together in her sleeping bag, which felt a little
crowded, to be honest, but was still nice. I had never felt
another person against me as I slept. It was a fine end to
the best day ofmy life.
one day before
the next morning, a termI use loosely since it was not
yet dawn, the Colonel shook me awake. Lara was wrapped inmy arms, folded into my body.
"We gotta go, Pudge. Timeto roll up."
"Dude. Sleeping."
"You can sleep after we check in. IT'S TIME TO GO!"
"You can sleep after we check in. IT'S TIME TO GO!"
heshouted.
"All right. All right. No screaming. Head hurts." And it
did. I could feel last night's wine in my throat and my
head throbbed like it had the morning after my
concussion. My mouth tasted like a skunk had crawled
into my throat and died. I made an effort not to exhale
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 50 of 88
near Lara as she groggily extricated herself from the
sleeping bag.
We packed everything quickly, threw our empty bottles
into thetall grass ofthefield—litteringwasan unfortunate
necessity at the Creek, since no one wanted to throw an
empty bottle of booze in a campus trash can—and walked away fromthe barn. Lara grabbed my hand and
then shyly let go. Alaska looked like a train wreck, but
insisted on pouring the last few sips of Strawberry Hill
into her cold instant coffee before chucking the bottle
behind her.
"Hair ofthe dog,"shesaid.
"Howya doin'?"the Colonelasked her.
"I've had better mornings."
"Hungover?"
"Likean alcoholic preacher on Sundaymorning."
"Maybe you shouldn't drink so much,"I suggested.
"Pudge." She shook her head and sipped the cold coffee
and wine. "Pudge, what youmust understand about meis
and wine. "Pudge, what youmust understand about meis
that Iama deeply unhappy person."
We walked side by side down the washed-out dirt road
on our way back to campus. Just after we reached the
bridge, Takumi stopped, said "uh-oh," got on his hands
and knees,and puked a volcano of yellowand pink.
"Let it out,"Alaskasaid. "You'll befine."
Hefinished, stood up,and said, "I finally found something
that can stop the fox. The fox cannot summit Strawberry Hill."
Alaska and Lara walked to their rooms, planning to
check inwith the Eaglelater in the day, while Takumiand
I stood behind the Colonelas he knocked on the Eagle's
doorat 9:00 A.M.
"Y'allare homeearly. Havefun?"
"Yes sir,"the Colonelsaid.
"How's your mom, Chip?"
"She's doingwell, sir. She's in good shape."
"Shefeed y'allwell?"
"Oh yes sir,"I said. "Shetried to fattenme up."
"You need it. Y'all havea good day."
"Well, I don't think he suspected anything," the Colonel
said on our way back to Room 43. "So maybe we
actually pulled it off." I thought about going over to see Lara, but I was pretty tired, so I just went to bed and
slept throughmy hangover.
It was not an eventful day. I should have done
It was not an eventful day. I should have done
extraordinary things. I should have sucked the marrow
out oflife. But on that day, I slepteighteen hours out ofa
possibletwenty-four.
thelast day
the next morning, the first Monday of the new
semester, the Colonelcame out of the shower justas my
alarmwent off. As I pulled onmy shoes, Kevin knocked
once and then opened the door, stepping inside. "You're
looking good," the Colonel said casually. Kevin's now
sported a crew cut, a small patch of short blue hair on
each side of his
head, just above the ear. His lower lip jutted out—the morning's first dip. He walked over to our COFFEE
TABLE, picked up acan ofCoke,and spit into it.
"You almost didn't get me. I noticed it in my conditioner
and got right back in the shower. But I didn't notice it in my gel. It didn't showup in Jeff's hairatall. But Longwell
and me, we had to go with the Marine look. Thank God
I haveclippers."
"It suits you," I said, although it didn't. The short hair
accentuated his features, specifically his too-closetogether beady eyes, which did
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 51 of 88
notstand up wellto accentuation. The Colonelwas trying
hard to look tough—ready for whatever Kevin might do —but it's hard to look tough when you're only wearing
an orangetowel.
"Truce?"
"Truce?"
"Well, your troubles aren't over, I'mafraid,"the Colonel
said, referring to the mailed-but-not-yet-received
progress reports.
"A'ight. If you say so. We'lltalk when it's over, I guess."
"I guess so,"the Colonelsaid. As Kevin walked out, the Colonel said, "Take the can you spit in, you unhygienic
shit."Kevin justclosed the door behind him. The Colonel
grabbed the can, opened the door, and threw itat Kevin —missing himby a good margin.
"Jeez, go easy on the guy."
"No truce yet. Pudge."
I spent that afternoon with Lara. We were very cutesy,
even though we didn't know the first thing about each
other and barely talked. But we made out. She grabbed my butt at one point, and I sort of jumped. I was lying
down, but I did the best version of jumping that one can
do lying down, and shesaid, "Sorry,"and I said, "No, it's
okay. It's justalittlesorefromtheswan."
We walked to the TV room together, and I locked the
door. We were watching The Brady Bunch, which she
had never seen. The episode, where the Bradys visit the
gold-mining ghost town and they all get locked up in the
one-room jail by some crazy old gold panner with a
scraggly white beard, was especially horrible, and gave
us a lot to laugh about. Which is good, since we didn't
have much to talk about.
Just as the Bradys were getting locked in jail, Lara
randomly asked me, "Have you ever gotten a blowjob?"
"Urn, that's out ofthe blue,"I said.
"The blue?"
"Like, you know, out ofleft field."
"Left field?"
"Like, in baseball. Like, out of nowhere. I mean, what made you think ofthat?"
"I've just never geeven one," she answered, her little
voice dripping with seductiveness. It was so brazen. I
thought I would explode. I never thought. I mean, from
Alaska, hearing that stuff was one thing. But to hear her
sweet little Romanian voice go so sexy all of the
sudden...
"No,"I said. "I never have."
"Think it would befun?"
DO I!?!?!?!?!?!?! "Urn. yeah. I mean, you don't have
to."
"I think I want to," she said, and we kissed a little, and
then. And then with me sitting watching The Brady Bunch, watchingMarcia Marcia Marcia up to her Brady
antics, Lara unbuttoned my pants and pulled my boxers
down alittleand pulled outmy penis.
"Wow,"shesaid.
"What?"
She looked up at me, but didn't move, her face
nanometersaway frommy penis. "It's weird."
"What do youmeanweird?"
"Just beeg, I guess."
"Just beeg, I guess."
I could live with that kind of weird. And then she wrapped her hand around itand put it into her mouth.
And waited.
We were both very still. She did not move a muscle in
her body, and I did not move a muscle in mine. I knew
thatat this pointsomething else was supposed to happen,
but I wasn't quitesure what.
She stayed still. I could feel her nervous breath. For minutes, foras long as it took the Bradys to steal the key
and unlock themselves
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 52 of 88
fromthe ghost-town jail, shelay there, stock-stillwithmy
penis in her mouth,and I sat there, waiting.
And then she took it out of her mouth and looked up at me quizzically.
"Should I do sometheeng?"
"Urn. I don't know," I said. Everything I'd learned from
watching porn with Alaska suddenly exited my brain. I
thought maybe she should move her head up and down,
but wouldn't thatchoke her? So I juststayed quiet.
"Should I, like, bite?"
"Don't bite! I mean, I don't think. I think—I mean, that
felt good. That was nice. I don't know if there's
something else."
"I mean, you deedn't—"
"I mean, you deedn't—"
"Urn. Maybe weshould ask Alaska."
So we went to her roomand askedAlaska. She laughed
and laughed. Sitting on her bed, she laughed until she
cried. She walked into the bathroom, returned with a
tube oftoothpaste, and showed us. In detail. Never have
I so wanted to be Crest Complete.
Laraand I went back to her room, whereshe did exactly what Alaska told her to do, and I did exactly what Alaska said I would do, which was die a hundred little
ecstatic deaths, my fists clenched, my body shaking. It was my first orgasm with a girl, and afterward, I was
embarrassed and nervous, and so, clearly, was Lara, who finally broke the silence by asking, "So, want to do
some homework?"
There was littleto do on thefirst day ofthesemester, but
sheread for her English class. I picked up a biography of Argentinian revolutionary Che Guevara—whose face
adorned a poster on the wall—that Lara's roommate had
on her bookshelf, then I lay down next to Lara on the
bottombunk. I began at theend, as I sometimes did with
biographies I had no intention of reading all the way
through, and found his last words without too much
searching. Captured by the Bolivian army, Guevara said,
"Shoot, coward. You are only going to kill a man." I
thought back to Simon Bolivar's last words in Garcia Marquez's novel—"How will I ever get out of this
labyrinth!" South American revolutionaries, it would
seem, died with flair. I read the last words out loud to Lara. She turned on her side, placing her head on my
chest.
"Why do you likelast words so much?"
Strange as it might seem, I'd never really thought about
Strange as it might seem, I'd never really thought about why. "I don't know,"I said, placing my hand against the
small of her back.
"Sometimes, just because they're funny. Like in the Civil War, a general named Sedgwick said, 'They couldn't hit
an elephant from this dis—' and then he got shot." She
laughed. "But a lot of times, people die how they live. And so last words tellme a lot about who people were,
and why they became the sort of people biographies get written about. Does thatmakesense?"
"Yeah,"shesaid.
"Yeah?"Just yeah?
"Yeah,"shesaid,and thenwent back to reading.
I didn't know how to talk to her. And I was frustrated with trying, so afteralittle while, I got up to go.
I kissed her good-bye. Icould do that,at least.
I picked up Alaska and the Colonelat our roomand we walked down to the bridge, where I repeated in
embarrassing detailthefellatio fiasco.
"I can't believe she went down on you twice in one day,"
the Colonelsaid.
"Only technically. Really just once,"Alaskacorrected.
"Still. I mean. Still. Pudge got his hog smoked."
"The poor Colonel,"Alaska said with a ruefulsmile. "I'd
give you a pity blow, but I really amattached to Jake."
"That's just creepy," the Colonel said. "You're only
supposed to flirt with Pudge."
"But Pudge hasa giiirrrrlllf riend."Shelaughed.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 53 of 88
That night, the Colonel and I walked down to Alaska's
roomto celebrate our Barn Night success. She and the Colonel had been celebrating a lot the past couple days,
and I didn't feel up to climbing Strawberry Hill, so I sat
and munched on pretzels while Alaska and the Colonel
drank winefrompapercups with flowers on them.
"Weain't drinkin' out the bottletonight, nun,"the Colonel
said.
"Weclassin' it up!"
"It's an old-time Southern drinking contest," Alaska
responded.
"We's a-gonna treat Pudge to an evening of real
Southern livin': We go'n match each other Dixie cup for Dixiecup tillthelesser drinker falls."
And that is pretty much what they did, pausing only to
turn out thelightsat 11:00 so the Eagle wouldn't drop by. They chatted some, but mostly they drank, and I drifted
out of the conversation and ended up squinting through
the dark, looking at the book spines in Alaska's Life Library. Even minus the books she'd lost in the miniflood, I could have stayed up until morning reading
through the haphazard stacks oftitles.
A dozen white tulips in a plastic vase were precariously
perched atop one of the book stacks, and when I asked
herabout them, shejustsaid,
"Jakeand my'sanniversary,"and I didn'tcareto continue
that line of dialogue, so I went back to scanning titles,
and I was just wondering how I could go about learning Edgar Allan Poe's last words (for the record:"Lord help my poor soul") when I heard Alaska say, "Pudge isn't
even listening to us."
And I said, "I'mlistening."
"We were just talking about Truth or Dare. Played out in
seventh grade or stillcool?"
"Never played it,"I said. "No friends in seventh grade."
"Well, that does it!"she shouted, a bit too loud given the
late hour and also given the fact that she was openly
drinkingwinein theroom. "Truth or Dare!"
"All right," I agreed, "but I'm not making out with the Colonel."
The Colonelsat slumped in the corner. "Can't make out. Too drunk."
Alaskastarted. "Truth or Dare, Pudge."
"Dare."
"Hook up withme."
So I did.
It was that quick. I laughed, looked nervous, and she
leaned in and tilted her head to the side, and we were
kissing. Zero layers between us. Our tongues dancing
back and forth in each other's mouth until there was no
her mouth and my mouth but only our mouths
intertwined. Shetasted likecigarettesand MountainDew
and wine and Chap Stick. Her hand came to my face
and wine and Chap Stick. Her hand came to my face
and I felt her soft fingers tracing the line of my jaw. We
lay down as we kissed, she on top ofme, and I began to move beneath her. I pulled away for a moment, to say,
"What is going on here?" and she put one finger to her
lips and we kissed again. A hand grabbed one of mine
and she placed it on her stomach. I moved slowly on top
of herand felt herarching her back fluidly beneathme.
I pulled away again. "What about Lara? Jake?" Again,
shesshed me. "Less tongue, more lips," she said, and I
tried my best. I thought the tongue was the whole point,
butshe was theexpert.
"Christ," the Colonel said quite loudly. "That wretched
beast, drama, draws nigh."
But we paid no attention. She moved my hand fromher waist to her breast, and I felt cautiously, my fingers moving slowly under her shirt but over her bra, tracing
the outline of her breasts and then cupping one in my
hand, squeezing softly. "You're good at that," she whispered.
Her lips never left mine as she spoke. We moved
together, my body between her legs.
"This is so fun,"she whispered, "but I'mso sleepy. To be
continued?" She kissed me for another moment, my mouth straining to stay near hers, and then she moved
frombeneath me, placed her head on my chest, and fell
asleep instantly.
We didn't have sex. We never got naked. I never
touched her bare breast, and her hands never got lower
thanmy hips. It didn'tmatter.
As sheslept, I whispered, "I love you, Alaska Young."
Just as I was falling asleep, the Colonel spoke. "Dude,
did you justmake out withAlaska?"
"Yeah."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 54 of 88
"This is going to end poorly,"hesaid to himself.
And then I was asleep. That deep, can-still-taste-her-in- my-mouth sleep, that sleep that is not particularly restful
but is difficult to wake from all the same. And then I
heard the phonering. I think. And I think,although Ican't
know, that I feltAlaska get up. I think I heard her leave.
I think. Howlong she was goneis impossibleto know.
But the Coloneland I both woke up when she returned, whenever that was, because she slammed the door. She was sobbing, like that post-Thanksgiving morning but worse.
"I haveto get out of here!"shecried.
"What's wrong?"Iasked.
"I forgot! God, howmany timescan I fuck up?"shesaid.
I didn'teven havetimeto wonder what sheforgot before
shescreamed, "I JUSTHAVE TO GO. HELPMEGET OUTOF HERE!"
"Where do you need to go?"
She sat down and put her head between her legs,
sobbing. "Just please distract the Eagleright nowso Ican
go. Please."
The Colonel and I, at the same moment, equal in our
guilt, said, "Okay."
"Just don't turn on your lights," the Colonel said. "Just
drive slow and don't turn on your lights. Are you sure
you're okay?"
"Fuck," she said. "Just get rid of the Eagle for me," she
said, her sobs childlike half screams. "God oh God, I'm
so sorry."
"Okay," the Colonel said. "Start the car when you hear
thesecond string."
Weleft.
We did notsay:Don't drive. You're drunk.
We did not say: We aren't letting you in that car when
you are upset.
We did notsay:Weinsist on going with you.
We did not say: This can wait until tomorrow. Anything—everything—can wait.
We walked to our bathroom, grabbed thethreestrings of
leftover firecrackers frombeneath thesink,and ran to the Eagle's. We weren'tsurethat it would work again.
But it worked well enough. The Eagle tore out of his
house as soon as the first string of firecrackers started
popping—he was waiting for us, I suppose—and we
headed for the woods and got himin deeply enough that
he never heard her drive away. The Colonel and I
doubled back, wading through the creek to save time,
slipped in through the back window of Room 43, and
slept like babies.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 55 of 88
after
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 56 of 88
the day after
the colonel slept the not-restfulsleep of the drunk, and
I lay onmy back on the bottombunk, my mouth tingling
and alive as ifstill kissing, and we would have likely slept
through our morning classes had the Eagle notawoken us
at 8:00 with three quick knocks. I rolled over as he
opened the door, and the morning light rushed into the
room.
"I need y'all to go to the gym," hesaid. I squinted toward
him, the Eagle himself backlit into invisibility by the too
brightsun.
"Now," he added, and I knew it. We were done for. Caught. Too many progress reports. Too much drinking
in too shortatime. Why did they haveto drink last night? And then I could taste her again, the wine and the
cigarette smoke and the Chap Stick and Alaska, and I wondered if she had kissed me because she was drunk. Don't expel me, I thought. Don't I have just begun to
kiss her.
And as ifanswering my prayers, the Eagle said, "You're
not in any trouble. But you need to go to the gymnow."
I heard the Colonel rolling over above me. "What's wrong?"
"Something terrible has happened," the Eagle said, and
then closed the door.
As he grabbed a pair of jeans lying on the floor, the Colonelsaid, "This happened a couple years ago. When Hyde's wife died. I guess it's the Old Man himself now.
Poor bastard really didn't have many breaths left." He
looked up at me, his half-open eyes bloodshot, and
yawned.
"You look alittle hungover,"I observed.
He closed his eyes. "Well, then I'm putting up a good
front, Pudge, 'causeI'mactually alot hungover."
"I kissed Alaska."
"Yeah. I wasn't that drunk. Let's go."
We walked across the dormcircle to the gym. I sported
baggy jeans, a sweatshirt with no shirt underneath, and a
bad case of bedhead.
All the teachers were in the dorm circle knocking on
doors, but I didn't see Dr. Hyde. I imagined him lying
dead in his house, wondered who had found him, how
they even knew he was missing before he failed to show
up forclass.
"I don'tsee Dr. Hyde,"I told the Colonel.
"Poor bastard."
The gymwas half full by the time we arrived. Apodium
had been set up in the middle of the basketball court,
close to the bleachers. I sat in the second row, with the
close to the bleachers. I sat in the second row, with the Colonel directly in front of me. My thoughts were split
between sadness for Dr. Hyde and excitement about Alaska, remembering the up-close sight of her mouth whispering, "To becontinued?"
And it did not occur to me—not even when Dr. Hyde
shuffled into the gym, taking tiny, slow steps toward the Coloneland me.
I tapped the Colonel on the shoulder and said, "Hyde's
here," and the Colonel said, "Oh shit," and I said,
"What?"and hesaid,
"Where's Alaska?" and I said, "No," and he said,
"Pudge, is she here or not?"and then we both stood up
and scanned thefaces in the gym.
The Eagle walked up to the podium and said, "Is
everyone here?"
"No,"I said to him. "Alaskaisn't here."
The Eaglelooked down. "Iseveryoneelse here?"
"Alaskaisn't here!"
"Okay, Miles. Thank you."
"Wecan'tstart without Alaska."
The Eagle looked at me. He was crying, noiselessly. Tears just rolled from his eyes to his chin and then fell
onto hiscorduroy pants.
He stared at me, but it was not the Look of Doom. His
eyes blinking the tears down his face, the Eagle looked,
forallthe world, sorry.
"Please, sir,"I said. "Can we please wait for Alaska?"I
"Please, sir,"I said. "Can we please wait for Alaska?"I
felt all of themstaring at us, trying to understand what I
nowknew, but didn't quite believe.
The Eagle looked down and bit his lower lip. "Last night, AlaskaYoungwas in aterribleaccident."His tearscame
faster, then. "And she was killed. Alaska has passed
away."
For a moment, everyone in the gym was silent, and the
place had never been so quiet, not even in the moments
before the Colonel ridiculed opponents at the free-throw
stripe. I stared down at the back ofthe Colonel's head. I
juststared, looking at his thick and bushy hair.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 57 of 88
For a moment, it was so quiet that you could hear the
sound of not-breathing, the vacuum created by 190
students shocked out ofair.
I thought:It's all myfault
I thought:I don't feelvery good.
I thought:I'm going to throw up.
I stood up and ran outside. I made it to a trash can
outside the gym, five feet from the double doors, and
heaved toward Gatorade bottles and half-eaten McDonald's. But nothing much came out. I just heaved, my stomach muscles tightening and my throat opening
and a gasping, guttural blech, going through the motions
of vomiting over and over again. In between gags and
coughs, I sucked air in hard. Her mouth. Her dead, cold mouth. To not be continued. I knew she was drunk.
mouth. To not be continued. I knew she was drunk. Upset. Obviously you don't let someone drive drunk and
pissed off. Obviously.
And Christ, Miles, what the hell is wrong with you? And
then comes the puke, finally, splashing onto the trash. And here is whatever of her I had left inmymouth, here
in this trash can. And then it comes again, more—and
then okay,calmdown, okay, seriously, she's not dead.
She's not dead. She'salive. She'salivesomewhere. She's
in the woods.Alaskais hiding in the woodsand she's not
dead, she's just hiding. She's just playing a trick on us. This is just an Alaska Young Prank Extraordinaire. It's Alaska beingAlaska, funny and playfuland not knowing when or howto put on the brakes.
And then I felt much better, because she had not died at
all.
I walked back into the gym, and everyone seemed to be
in various stages of disintegration. It was like something
you see on TV, like a National Geographic special on
funeral rituals. I saw Takumi standing over Lara, his
hands on her shoulders. I saw Kevin with his crew cut,
his head buried between his knees. A girl named Molly Tan, who'd studied with us for precalc, wailed, beating
balled fists against her thighs. All these people I sort of
knew and sort of didn't, and all of them disintegrating,
and then I saw the Colonel, his knees tucked into his
chest, lying on his side on the bleachers, Madame O'Malley sitting next to him, reaching toward his shoulder
but not actually touching it. The Colonel was screaming. He would inhale, and then scream. Inhale. Scream.
Inhale. Scream.
I thought, at first, that it was only yelling. But after a few
breaths, I noticed a rhythm. And after a few more, I
realized that the Colonel was saying words. He was
realized that the Colonel was saying words. He was
screaming, "I'mso sorry."
Madame O'Malley grabbed his hand. "You've got
nothing to be sorry for, Chip. There was nothing you
could have done."But if only she knew.
And I just stood there, looking at the scene, thinking
about her not dead, and I felta hand onmy shoulderand
turned around to see the Eagle, and I said, "I think she's
playing a dumb prank,"and he said, "No, Miles, no, I'm
sorry,"and I felt the heat in my cheeks and said, "She's
really good. She could pull this off,"and he said, "I saw
her. I'msorry."
"What happened?"
"Somebodywas setting offfirecrackers in the woods,"he
said, and I closed my eyes tight, the ineluctable fact of
the matter at hand: I had killed her. "I went out after
them, and I guess she drove offcampus. It was late. She was on I-65 just south of downtown. A truck had
jackknifed, blocking both lanes. A police car had just
gotten to the scene. She hit the cruiser without ever
swerving. I believe she must have been very intoxicated. The policesaid they smelled alcohol."
"Howdo you know?"Iasked.
"I saw her, Miles. I talked to the police. It was instant. Thesteeringwheel hit herchest. I'mso sorry."
And I said, you saw her and he said yes and I said how
did she look and he said, just a bit of blood coming out
of her nose, and I sat down on the floor of the gym. I
could hear the Colonel still screaming, and I could feel
hands onmy back as I hunched forward, but Icould only
see her lying naked on a metal table, a small trickle of
blood falling out of her half-teardrop nose, her green
blood falling out of her half-teardrop nose, her green
eyes open, staring off into the distance, her mouth turned
up justenough to suggest theidea ofasmile, and she had
felt so warm against me, her mouth soft and warm on mine.
The Coloneland Iare walking back to our dormroomin
silence. I amstaring at the ground beneath me. I cannot
stop thinking that she is dead, and I cannot stop thinking
that she cannot possibly be dead. People do not just die.
I can't catch my breath. I feel afraid, like someone has
told me they're going to kick my ass after school and
now it's sixth period and I know full well what's coming.
It is so cold today—literally freezing—and I imagine
running to the creek and diving in headfirst, the creek so
shallow that my hands scrape against the rocks, and my
body slides into the cold water, the shock of the cold
giving way to numbness, and I would stay there, float
down with that water first to the Cahaba River, then to
the Alabama River, then to Mobile Bay and the Gulf of Mexico.
I want to melt into the brown, crunchy grass that the Coloneland I step on as we silentlymake our way back
to our room. His feet are so large, too large for his short
body, and the new generic tennis shoes he wears since
his old ones were pissed in look almost likeclown shoes.
I think ofAlaska's flip-flops clinging to her blue toes as weswung on theswing down by thelake. Willthecasket
be open? Can a mortician re-create her smile? I could
still hear her saying it: "This is so fun, but I'mso sleepy. To becontinued?"
Nineteenth-century preacher Henry Ward Beecher's last words were "Now comes the mystery." The poet Dylan Thomas, who liked a good drink at least as much as Alaska, said, "I've had eighteen straight whiskeys. I do
believe that's a record," before dying. Alaska's favorite
believe that's a record," before dying. Alaska's favorite was playwright Eugene O'Neill: "Born in a hotel room,
and—God damn it—died in a hotel room." Even caraccident victims sometimes have time
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 58 of 88
for last words. Princess Diana said, "Oh God. What's
happened?"Moviestar James Dean said, "They've got to
see us," just before slamming his Porsche into another
car. I know so many last words. But I will never know
hers.
I amseveralsteps in front of himbefore I realize that the Colonel has fallen down. I turn around, and heis lying on
his face. "We have to get up, Chip. We have to get up. Wejust haveto get to theroom."
The Colonel turns his face from the ground to me and
looks me dead in theeyeand says, "I. Can't. Breathe."
But hecan breathe, and I know this because he is
hyperventilating, breathing as if trying to blow air back
into the dead. I pick himup, and he grabs onto me and
starts sobbing, again saying, "I'm so sorry," over and
over again. We have never hugged before, me and the Colonel, and there is nothing much to say, because he
ought to be sorry, and I just put my hand on the back of
his head and say the only truething. "I'msorry, too."
two daysafter
I DIDN'T SLEEP THAT NIGHT. Dawn was slow in
coming, and even when it did, the sun shining bright
through the blinds, the rickety radiator couldn't keep us warm, so the Coloneland I sat wordlessly on the couch. Heread thealmanac.
Heread thealmanac.
The night before, I'd braved the cold to callmy parents,
and this time when I said, "Hey, it's Miles,"and mymom
answered with,
"What's wrong? Is everything okay?" I could safely tell
her no, everything was not okay. My dad picked up the
linethen.
"What's wrong?"heasked.
"Don't yell,"mymother said.
"I'mnot yelling; it's just the phone."
"Well, talk quieter," she said, and so it took some time
before I could say anything, and then once I could, it
took some time to say the words in order—my friend Alaska died in a car crash. I stared at the numbers and messages scrawled on the wall by the phone.
"Oh, Miles," Mom said. "I'm so sorry, Miles. Do you want to come home?"
"No,"I said. "I want to be here...Ican't believeit,"which was still partly true.
"That's just awful," my dad said. "Her poor parents." Poor parent, I thought, and wondered about her dad. I
couldn't even imagine what my parents would do if I
died. Driving drunk. God, if her fatherever found out, he would disembowelthe Coloneland me.
"Whatcanwe do for you right now?"mymomasked.
"I just needed you to pick up. I just needed you to
answer the phone, and you did."I heard a sniffle behind me—from cold or grief, I didn't know—and told my
parents, "Someone's waiting for the phone. I gotta go."
parents, "Someone's waiting for the phone. I gotta go."
All night, I felt paralyzed into silence, terrorized. What was I so afraid of, anyway? The thing had happened.
She was dead. She was warmand soft against my skin, my tongue in her mouth, and she was laughing, trying to
teachme, make me better, promising to becontinued.
And now.
And now she was colder by the hour, more dead with
every breath I took. I thought:That is the fear: I have
lost something important, and I cannot find it, and I
need it It is fear like if someone lost his glasses and went to the glasses store and they told him that the world had run out of glasses and he would just have
to do without
Just before eight in the morning, the Colonelannounced
to no one in particular, "I think there are bufriedos at
lunch today."
"Yeah,"I said. "Are you hungry?"
"God no. But she named them, you know. They were
called fried burritos when we got here, and Alaska
started calling them bufriedos, and then everyone did,
and then finallyMaureen officially changed the name."He
paused. "I don't knowwhat to do, Miles."
"Yeah. I know."
"I finished memorizing thecapitals,"hesaid.
"Ofthestates?"
"No. That was fifth grade. Of the countries. Name a
country."
"Canada,"I said.
"Canada,"I said.
"Something hard."
"Urn. Uzbekistan?"
"Tashkent." He didn't even take a moment to think. It was just there, at the tip of his tongue, as if he'd been waiting for meto say
"Uzbekistan"allalong. "Let's smoke."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 59 of 88
We walked to the bathroomand turned on the shower,
and the Colonel pulled a pack ofmatches fromhis jeans
and struck a match against the matchbook. It didn't light. Again, he tried and failed, and again, smacking at the matchbook with a crescendoing fury until he finally threw
the matches to the ground and screamed, "GODDAMN
IT!"
"It's okay,"I said, reaching into my pocket foralighter.
"No, Pudge, it's not," he said, throwing down his
cigarette and standing up, suddenly pissed. "Goddamn it! God, howdid this happen?
How could she be so stupid! She just never thought
anything through. So goddamned impulsive. Christ. It is
not okay. Ican't believeshe was so stupid!"
"Weshould havestopped her,"I said.
He reached into the stall to turn off the dribbling shower
and then pounded an open palm against the tile wall.
"Yeah, I know we should have stopped her, damn it. I
amshit sure keenly aware that we should have stopped
her. But weshouldn't have had to.You had to watch her
likeathree-year-old. You do one thingwrong, and then
shejust dies. Christ! I'mlosing it. I'mgoing on a walk."
"Okay,"Ianswered, trying to keep my voicecalm.
"I'm sorry," he said. "I feel so screwed up. I feel like I might die."
"Youmight,"I said.
"Yeah.Yeah. I might.You never know. It's just. It's like. POOF. And you're gone."
I followed him into the room. He grabbed the almanac
from his bunk, zipped his jacket, closed the door, and POOF. He was gone.
With morning came visitors. An hour after the Colonel
left, resident stoner Hank Walsten dropped by to offer me some weed, which I graciously turned down. Hank
hugged me and said, "At least it was instant. At least
there wasn'tany pain."
I knew he was only trying to help, but he didn't get it. There was pain. A dull endless pain in my gut that wouldn't go away even when I knelt on the stingingly
frozen tile ofthe bathroom, dry-heaving.
And what is an "instant" death anyway? How long is an
instant? Is it one second? Ten? The pain of those
seconds must have been awfulas her heart burstand her
lungscollapsed and there was no airand no blood to her
brain and only rawpanic. What the hellis instant?
Nothing is instant. Instant rice takes five minutes, instant
pudding an hour. I doubt that an instant of blinding pain
pudding an hour. I doubt that an instant of blinding pain
feels particularly instantaneous.
Was there time for her life to flash before her eyes? Was
I there? Was Jake? And she promised, I remembered,
she promised to be continued, but I knew, too, that she was driving northwhen she died, north toward Nashville,
toward Jake. Maybe it hadn't meant anything to her, had
been nothingmorethan another grand impulsivity. And as Hank stood in the doorway, I just looked past him,
looking across the too-quiet dormcircle, wondering if it
had mattered to her, and I can only tell myself that of
course, yes, she had promised. To becontinued.
Lara came next, her eyes heavy with swelling. "What
happeened?"she asked me as I held her, standing onmy
tiptoes so Icould place my chin on top of her head.
"I don't know,"I said.
"Deed you see her that night?"she asked, speaking into my collarbone.
"She got drunk,"I told her. "The Coloneland I went to
sleep, and I guess she drove off campus." And that
becamethestandard lie.
I felt Lara's fingers, wet with her tears, press against my
palm, and before I could think better of it, I pulled my
hand away. "I'msorry,"
I said.
"Eet's okay,"she said. "I'll be eenmy roomeef youwant
to come by." I did not drop by. I didn't know what to
say to her—I wascaught in alovetriangle with one dead
side.
That afternoon, we allfiled into the gymagain for a town
That afternoon, we allfiled into the gymagain for a town meeting. The Eagle announced that the school would
charter a bus on Sunday to the funeral in Vine Station. As we got up to leave, I noticed Takumi and Lara walking toward me. Lara caught my eye and smiled wanly. I smiled back, but quickly turned and hid myself
amid the mass ofmourners filing out ofthe gym.
I am sleeping, and Alaska flies into the room. She is
naked, and intact. Her breasts, which I felt only very
briefly and in the dark, are luminously full as they hang
down fromher body. She hovers inches above me, her
breath warm and sweet against my face like a breeze
passing through tall grass.
"Hi,"I say. "I've missed you."
"You look good, Pudge."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 60 of 88
"So do you."
"I'mso naked,"she says, and laughs. "How did I get so
naked?"
"I just want you to stay,"I say.
"No,"shesays, and her weight falls dead onme, crushing my chest, stealing away my breath, and she is cold and wet, like melting ice.
Her head is split in half and a pink-gray sludge oozes
from the fracture in her skull and drips down onto my
face, and she stinks of formaldehyde and rotting meat. I
gag and push her offme, terrified.
I woke up falling, and landed with a thud on the floor. Thank God I'm a bottom-bunk man. I had slept for
fourteen hours. It was morning.
Wednesday, I thought. Her funeral Sunday. I wondered
ifthe Colonelwould get back by then, where he was. He
had to come back for thefuneral, becauseIcould not go
alone, and going with anyone other than the Colonel would amount to alone.
The cold wind buffeted against the door, and the trees
outside the back window shook with such force that I
could hear it from our room, and I sat in my bed and
thought of the Colonel out there somewhere, his head
down, his teeth clenched, walking into the wind.
four daysafter
it was five in the morning and I was reading a
biography ofthe explorer Meriwether Lewis (of&Clark
fame) and trying to stay awake when the door opened
and the Colonelwalked in.
His pale hands shook, and the almanac he held looked
likea puppet dancingwithoutstrings.
"Are you cold?"Iasked.
He nodded, slipped off his sneakers, and climbed into my bed on the bottom bunk, pulling up the covers. His
teeth chattered like Morsecode.
"Jesus. Are you allright?"
"Better now. Warmer," he said. A small, ghost white
hand appeared from beneath the comforter. "Hold my
hand, will ya?"
"All right, but that's it. No kissing." The quilt shook with
"All right, but that's it. No kissing." The quilt shook with
his laughter.
"Where have you been?"
"I walked to Montevallo."
"Fortymiles?!"
"Forty-two," he corrected me. "Well. Forty-two there.
Forty-two back. Eighty-two miles. No. Eighty-four.Yes. Eighty-four miles in forty-five hours."
"What the hell's inMontevallo?"Iasked.
"Not much. I just walked till I got too cold, and then I
turned around."
"You didn'tsleep?"
"No! The dreams are terrible. Inmy dreams, she doesn't
even look like herself anymore. I don't even remember whatshelooked like."
I let go of his hand, grabbed last year's yearbook, and
found her picture. In the black-and-white photograph,
she's wearing her orange tank top and cutoff jeans that
stretch halfway down her skinny thighs, her mouth open wide in a frozen laugh as her left armholds Takumi in a
headlock. Her hair falls over her face just enough to
obscure hercheeks.
"Right," the Colonel said. "Yeah. I was so tired of her
getting upset for no reason. The way she would get sulky
and makereferences to thefreaking oppressive weight of
tragedy or whatever but then never said what was wrong, never have any goddamned reason to be sad. And I just think you ought to have areason. My
girlfriend dumped me, so I'msad. I got caught smoking,
so I'm pissed off. My head hurts, so I'm cranky. She
never had areason, Pudge. I was just so tired of putting
up with her drama. And I just let her go. Christ."
Her moodiness had annoyed me, too, sometimes, but not
that night. That night I let her go because she told me to.
It was thatsimplefor me,and thatstupid.
The Colonel's hand was so little, and I grabbed it tight,
his cold seeping into me and my warmth into him. "I memorized the populations,"hesaid.
"Uzbekistan."
"Twenty-four million seven hundred fifty-five thousand
five hundred and nineteen."
"Cameroon,"I said, but it was too late. He was asleep,
his hand limp inmine. I placed it back under the quiltand
climbed up into his
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 61 of 88
bed, a top-bunk man for this night at least. I fell asleep
listening to his slow,even breaths, his stubbornness finally melting away in theface ofinsurmountablefatigue.
six daysafter
that Sunday, I got up after three hours of sleep and
showered for the first time in a long while. I put on my
only suit. I almost hadn't brought it, but mymominsisted
that you never know when you're going to need a suit,
and sureenough.
The Colonel did not own a suit, and by virtue of his
stature could not borrow one fromanyone at the Creek,
stature could not borrow one fromanyone at the Creek,
so he wore black slacksand a gray button-down.
"I don't suppose I can wear the flamingo tie," he said as
he pulled on black socks.
"It'sa bit festive, given the occasion,"I responded.
"Can't wear it to the opera," said the Colonel, almost
smiling.
"Can't wear it to afuneral. Can't useit to hangmyself. It's
a bit useless,as ties go."I gave himatie.
Theschool had chartered buses to ferry students north to Alaska's hometown of Vine Station, but Lara, the Colonel, Takumi, and I drove in Takumi's SUV, taking
the back roads so we didn't have to drive past the spot
on the highway. I stared out the window, watching as the
suburban sprawl surrounding Birmingham faded into the
slow-sloping hillsand fields of northernAlabama.
Up front, Takumitold Laraabout thetime Alaska got her
boob honked over the summer, and Lara laughed. That was the first time I had seen her, and now we were
coming to the last. More than anything, I felt the
unfairness ofit, theinarguableinjustice ofloving someone who might have loved you back but can't due to
deadness, and then I leaned forward, my forehead
against the back of Takumi's headrest, and I cried, whimpering, and I didn't even feel sadness so much as
pain. It hurt, and that is not a euphemism. It hurt like a
beating.
Meriwether Lewis's last words were, "I am not a
coward, but I am so strong. So hard to die." I don't
doubt that it is, but it cannot be much harder than being
left behind. I thought of Lewisas I followed Larainto the A-frame chapelattached to the single-story funeral home
A-frame chapelattached to the single-story funeral home
in Vine Station, Alabama, a town every bit as depressed
and depressing as Alaska had always made it out to be. The place smelled of mildew and disinfectant, and the
yellowwallpaper in thefoyer was peeling at thecorners.
"Are y'all herefor Ms.Young?"a guy asked the Colonel,
and the Colonel nodded. We were led to a large room
with rows of folding chairs populated by only one man. He knelt before a coffin at the front of the chapel. The
coffinwas closed. Closed. Never going to see her again. Can't kiss her forehead. Can't see her onelast time. But I
needed to, I needed to see her, and much too loud, I
asked,
"Why is it closed?"and the man, whose potbelly pushed
out from his too-tight suit, turned around and walked
toward me.
"Her mother," he said. "Her mother had an open casket,
and Alaska told me, 'Don't ever let them see me dead, Daddy,' and so that's that. Anyway, son, she's not in
there. She's with the Lord."
And he put his hands onmy shoulders, this manwho had
grown fat since he'd last had to wear a suit, and I
couldn't believe what I had done to him, his eyes
glittering green like Alaska's but sunk deep into dark
sockets, like a green-eyed, still-breathing ghost, and
don't no don't don't die,Alaska. Don't die.And I walked
out of his embrace and past Lara and Takumi to her
casket and knelt before it and placed my hands on the
finished wood, the dark mahogany, the color of her hair.
I felt the Colonel's small hands on my shoulders, and a
tear dripped onto my head, and for a few moments, it was just the three of us—the buses of students hadn't
arrived, and Takumi and Lara had faded away, and it was just thethree of us—three bodiesand two people—
the three who knew what had happened and too many
the three who knew what had happened and too many
layers between all of us, too much keeping us fromone
another. The Colonel said, "I just want to save her so
bad," and I said, "Chip, she's gone," and he said, "I
thought I'd feel her looking down on us, but you're right.
She's just gone," and I said, "Oh God, Alaska, I love
you. I love you," and the Colonel whispered, "I'm so
sorry, Pudge. I knowyou did,"and I said, "No. Not past
tense." She wasn't even a person anymore, just flesh
rotting, but I loved her present tense. The Colonel knelt
down beside me and put his lips to the coffin and whispered, "I am sorry, Alaska. You deserved a better
friend."
Is it so hard to die, Mr. Lewis? Is that labyrinth really worsethan this one?
seven days after
I SPENT THE NEXT DAY in our room, playing
football onmute,at once unableto do nothing and unable
to do anythingmuch. It was MartinLuther KingDay, our
last day before classes started again, and Icould think of
nothing but having killed her. The Colonel spent the morning with me, but then he decided to go to the
cafeteriafor meat loaf.
"Let's go,"hesaid.
"Not hungry."
"You haveto eat."
"Wanna bet?"Iasked without looking up fromthe game.
"Christ. Fine." He sighed and left, slamming the door
behind him. He's stillvery angry, I found myselfthinking with a bit of pity. No
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 62 of 88
reason to be angry. Anger just distracts from the allencompassing sadness, the frank knowledge that you
killed her and robbed her of a future and a life. Getting
pissed wouldn't fix it. Damn it.
"How's the meat loaf?" I asked the Colonel when he
returned.
"Aboutas you remember it. Neither meaty nor loafy."The Colonel sat down next to me. "The Eagle ate with me. He wanted to knowifweset offthefireworks."I paused
the gameand turned to him. With one hand, he picked at
one ofthe last remaining pieces of blue vinyl on our foam
couch.
"And you said?"Iasked.
"I didn't rat. Anyway, he said her aunt or something is
coming tomorrow to clean out her room. So if there's
anything that's ours, oranything heraunt wouldn't want to
find..."
I turned back to the game and said, "I'm not up for it
today."
"Then I'll do it alone," he answered. He turned and walked outside, leaving the door open, and the bitter
remnants of the cold snap quickly overwhelmed the
radiator, so I paused the game and stood up to close the
door, and when I peeked around the corner to see if the Colonel had entered her room, he was standing there,
just outside our door, and he grabbed onto my
sweatshirt, smiled, and said, "Iknew you wouldn't make me do thatalone. Iknew it."I shook my head and rolled
me do thatalone. Iknew it."I shook my head and rolled my eyes but followed him down the sidewalk, past the
pay phone,and into her room.
I hadn't thought of her smellsinceshe died. But when the Colonel opened the door, I caught the edge of her scent: wet dirt and grass and cigarette smoke, and beneath that
the vestiges of vanilla-scented skin lotion. She flooded
into my present, and only tact kept me fromburying my
face in the dirty laundry overfilling the hamper by her
dresser. It looked as I remembered it: hundreds of books
stacked against the walls, her lavender comforter
crumpled at the foot of her bed, a precarious stack of
books on her bedside table, her volcanic candle just
peaking out frombeneath the bed. It looked as I knew it would, but the smell, unmistakably her, shocked me. I
stood in the center of the room, my eyes shut, inhaling
slowly throughmy nose, the vanilla and the uncut autumn
grass, but with each slow breath, the smell faded as I
becameaccustomed to it,and soon she was goneagain.
"This is unbearable," I said matter-of-factly, because it was.
"God. These books she'll never read. Her Life's Library."
"Bought at garage sales and now probably destined for
another one."
"Ashes to ashes. Garagesaleto garagesale,"I said.
"Right. Okay, down to business. Get anything her aunt wouldn't want to find," the Colonel said, and I saw him
kneeling at her desk, the drawer beneath her computer
pulled open, his smallfingers pulling out groups ofstapled
papers. "Christ, she keptevery paper sheever wrote.
Moby-Dick. Ethan Frome."
I reached between her mattress and box spring for the
I reached between her mattress and box spring for the
condoms I knew she hid for Jake's visits. I pocketed
them, and then went over to her dresser, searching
through her underwear for hidden bottles ofliquor or sex
toys or God knows what. I found nothing. And then I
settled on the books, staring at them stacked on their
sides, spines out, the haphazard collection of literature
that was Alaska. There was one book I wanted to take withme, but Icouldn't find it.
The Colonel was sitting on the floor next to her bed, his
head bent toward thefloor, looking under her bed frame.
"Shesure didn't leaveany booze, did she?"heasked.
And I almost said, She buried it in the woods out by
the soccer field, but I realized that the Colonel didn't
know, that she never took himto the edge of the woods
and told himto dig for buried treasure, that sheand I had
shared that alone, and I kept it for myself like a
keepsake, as if sharing the memory might lead to its
dissipation.
"Do you see The General in His Labyrinth anywhere?"
I asked while scanning the titles on the book spines. "It
has a lot of green on the cover, I think. It's a paperback,
and it got flooded, so the pages are probably bloated,
but I don't think she—" and then he cut me off with,
"Yeah, it's right here," and I turned around and he was
holding it, the pages fanned out like an accordion from
Longwell, Jeff, and Kevin's prank, and I walked over to
him and took it and sat down on her bed. The places
she'd underlined and the little notes she'd written had all
been blurred out by the soaking, but the book was still mostly readable, and I was thinking I would take it back
to my room and try to read it even though it wasn't a
biographywhen I flipped to that page, toward the back:
He was shaken by the overwhelming revelation that the
He was shaken by the overwhelming revelation that the
headlong race between his misfortunes and his dreams was at that moment reaching the finish line. The rest was
darkness. "Damn it," he sighed. "How will I ever get out
ofthis labyrinth!"
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 63 of 88
The whole passage was underlined in bleeding, watersoaked black ink. But there was another ink, this one a
crisp blue, post-flood, and an arrowled from"HowwillI
ever get out of this labyrinth!"to a margin note written in
her loop-heavy cursive: Straight &Fast.
"Hey, she wrotesomething in hereafter theflood,"I said.
"But it's weird. Look. Page one ninety-two."I tossed the
book to the Colonel, and he flipped to the page and then
looked up atme. "Straightand fast,"hesaid.
"Yeah. Weird, huh? The way out of the labyrinth, I
guess."
"Wait, howdid it happen? What happened?"
And because there was only oneit, I knew to what he was referring. "I told youwhat the Eagletold me. Atruck
jackknifed on theroad.
Acop car showed up to stop traffic, and she ran into the
cop car. She was so drunk she didn'teven swerve."
"So drunk? So drunk? The cop car would have had its
lights on. Pudge, she ran into a cop car that had its lights
on,"hesaid hurriedly.
"Straightand fast. Straightand fast. Out ofthelabyrinth."
"No,"I said, but even as I said it, I could see it. I could
see her drunk enough and pissed off enough. (About what—about cheating on Jake? About hurting me? About wantingme and not him? Still pissed about ratting
out Marya?) I could see her staring down the cop car
and aiming for it and not giving a shit about anyone else,
not thinking of her promise to me, not thinking of her
father or anyone, and that bitch, that bitch, she killed
herself. But no. No. That was not her. No. She said To
becontinued. Ofcourse. "No."
"Yeah, you're probably right," the Colonel said. He
dropped the book, sat down on the bed next to me, and
put his forehead in his hands. "Who drives six miles off
campus to kill herself? Doesn't make any sense. But
'straightand fast.' Bit ofan odd premonition, isn't it?And we still don't really know what happened, if you think
about it. Where she was going, why. Who called.
Someonecalled, right, or did I make—"
And the Colonel kept talking, puzzling it out, while I
picked up the book and found my way to that page where the general's headlong race came to its end, and we were both stuck in our heads, the distance between
us unbridgeable, and I could not listen to the Colonel,
because I was busy trying to get the last hints of her
smell, busy tellingmyself that ofcourse she had not done
it. It was me—I had done it, and so had the Colonel. He
could try to puzzle his way out of it, but I knew better,
knew that we could never be anything but wholly,
unforgivably guilty.
eight days after
Tuesday—we had school for the first time. Madame O'Malley had a moment of silence at the beginning of
French class, a class that was always punctuated with
French class, a class that was always punctuated with
long moments of silence, and then asked us how we werefeeling.
"Awful,"a girlsaid.
"En francais," Madame O'Malley replied. "En
francais."
Everything looked the same, but more still: the Weekday Warriors still sat on the benches outside the library, but
their gossip was quiet, understated. The cafeteria
clamored with thesounds of plastictraysagainst wooden
tables and forks scraping plates, but any conversations were muted. Butmorethan the noiselessness ofeveryone
else was the silence where she should have been, the
bubbling bursting storytelling Alaska, but instead it felt
likethosetimes when she had withdrawn into herself, like
she was refusing to answer how or why questions, only
this timefor good.
The Colonelsat down next to mein religion class, sighed,
and said, "You reek ofsmoke, Pudge."
"Ask meifI giveashit."
Dr. Hydeshuffled into class then, our finalexams stacked
underneath one arm. He sat down, took a series of
labored breaths, and began to talk. "It is a law that
parents should not have to bury their children," he said.
"And someone should enforce it. This semester, we're
going to continuestudying thereligious traditions to which
youwereintroduced this fall. But there's no doubting that
the questions we'll be asking have more immediacy now
than they did just a few days ago. What happens to us
after we die, for instance, is no longer a question of idle
philosophical interest. It is a question we must ask about
our classmate. And how to live in the shadow of grief is
not something nameless Buddhists, Christians, and
not something nameless Buddhists, Christians, and Muslims have to explore. The questions of religious
thought have become, I suspect, personal."
He shuffled through our exams, pulling one out fromthe
pile before him. "I have here Alaska's final. You'll recall
that you were asked what the most important question
facing people is, and how the three traditions we're
studying this year address that question. This was Alaska's question."
With a sigh, he grabbed hold of his chair and lifted
himself out ofit, thenwrote on the blackboard:How will weever get out of this labyrinth of suf ering?—A. Y.
"I'mgoing to leave that up for the rest of the semester,"
hesaid.
"Because everybody who has ever lost their way in life
has felt the nagging insistence of that question. At some
point we all look up and realize we are lost in a maze,
and I don't want us to forgetAlaska, and I don't want to
forget that even when the material we study seems
boring, we're trying to understand how people have
answered that question and the questions each of you
posed in your papers—how different traditions have
come to terms with what Chip, in his final, called
'people's rotten lots in life.'"
Hydesat down. "So, howare you guys doing?"
The Coloneland I said nothing, while a bunch of people who didn't know Alaska extolled her virtues and
professed to be devastated, and at first, it bothered me. I
didn't want the people she didn't know—and the people
she didn't like—to besad. They'd nevercared about her,
and now they were carrying on as if she were a sister. But I guess I didn't knowhercompletely, either. IfI had,
I'd have knownwhat she'd meant by "To be continued?"
I'd have knownwhat she'd meant by "To be continued?" And if I had cared about her as I should have, as I
thought I did, howcould I havelet her go?
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 64 of 88
So they didn't bother me, really. But next to me, the Colonel breathed slowly and deeply through his noselike
a bullabout to charge.
He actually rolled his eyes when Weekday Warrior Brooke Blakely, whose parents had received a progress
reportcourtesy ofAlaska, said, "I'mjust sad I never told
her I loved her. I just don't understand why."
"That's such bullshit," the Colonel said as we walked to
lunch. "As if Brooke Blakely gives two shits about Alaska."
"IfBrooke Blakely died, wouldn't you besad?"Iasked.
"I guess, but I wouldn't bemoan thefact I never told her I
loved her. I don't love her. She'san idiot."
I thought everyone else had a better excuse to grieve
thanwe did—afterall, they hadn't killed her—but I knew
better than to try to talk to the Colonel when he was mad.
nine days after
"i've got a theory," the Colonelsaid as I walked in the
door after a miserable day of classes. The cold had
begun to let up, but word had not spread to whoever ran
the furnaces, so the classrooms were all stuffy and
overheated, and I just wanted to crawl into bed and
sleep untilthetimecameto do itall overagain.
sleep untilthetimecameto do itall overagain.
"Missed you in class today,"I noted as I sat down onmy
bed. The Colonel sat at his desk, hunched over a
notebook. I lay down onmy back and pulled the covers
up over my head, but the Colonelwas undiscouraged.
"Right, well, I was busy coming up with thetheory, which
isn't terribly likely,admittedly, but it's plausible. So, listen.
She kisses you.
That night, someone calls. Jake, I imagine. They have a
fight—about cheating or about something else—who
knows. So she's upset, and she wants to go see him. She
comes back to the roomcrying, and she tells us to help
her get off campus. And she's freaked out, because, I
don't know, let's say because if she can't go visit him,
Jake will break up with her. That's just a hypothetical
reason. So she gets offcampus, drunk and all pissed off,
and she's furious at herself over whatever it is, and she's
driving along and sees the cop car and then in a flash
everything comes togetherand theend to her labyrinthine mystery is staring her right in thefaceand shejust does it,
straight and fast, just aims at the cop car and never
swerves, not because she's drunk but because she killed
herself."
"That's ridiculous. She wasn't thinking about Jake or
fightingwith Jake. She was making out with me. I tried
to bring up the whole Jake thing, but she just shushed me."
"So who called her?"
I kicked off my comforter and, my fist balled, smashed my hand against the wall with each syllable as I said, "I! DON'T! KNOW! And you know what, it doesn't matter. She's dead. Is the brilliant Colonel going to figure
outsomething that's gonna make her less freaking dead?"
outsomething that's gonna make her less freaking dead?"
But it did matter, of course, which is why I kept
pounding at our cinder-block walls and why the
questions had floated beneath the surface for a week. Who'd called? What was wrong? Why did she leave?
Jake had not goneto her funeral. Nor had hecalled us to
say he was sorry, or to ask us what happened. He had
just disappeared, and ofcourse, I had wondered. I had wondered ifshe had any intention of keeping her promise
that we would becontinued. I had wondered who called,
and why, and what made her so upset. But I'd rather wonder than getanswers Icouldn't live with.
"Maybe she was driving there to break up with Jake,
then,"the Colonel said, his voice suddenly edgeless. He
sat down on thecorner ofmy bed.
"I don't know. I don't reallywant to know."
"Yeah, well," he said. "I want to know. Because if she
knew what she was doing, Pudge, she made us
accomplices. And I hate her for that. I mean, God, look
at us. We can'teven talk to anyone anymore. So listen, I wrote outa game plan:One. Talk to eyewitnesses. Two.
Figure out how drunk she was. Three. Figure out where
she was going,and why."
"I don't want to talk to Jake," I said halfheartedly,
already resigned to the Colonel's incessant planning. "If
he knows, I definitely don't want to talk to him.And if he
doesn't, I don't want to pretend likeit didn't happen."
The Colonel stood up and sighed. "You know what,
Pudge? I feel bad for you. I do. I know you kissed her,
and I know you're broken up about it. But honestly, shut
up. If Jake knows, you're not gonna make it any worse. And if he doesn't, he won't find out. So just stop worrying about your goddamned self for one minute and
worrying about your goddamned self for one minute and
think about your dead friend. Sorry. Long day."
"It's fine,"I said, pulling the covers back over my head.
"It's fine,"I repeated. And, whatever. It was fine. It had
to be. Icouldn'tafford to losethe Colonel.
thirteen days after
because our main source of vehicular transportation was interred inVine Station, Alabama, the Coloneland I were forced to walk to the PelhamPolice Department to
search foreyewitnesses. Weleftaftereating dinner in the
cafeteria, the night falling fast and early, and trudged up Highway 119 for a mile and a half before coming to a
single-story stucco building situated between a Waffle House and a gas
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 65 of 88
station.
Inside, along desk that roseto the Colonel's solar plexus
separated us from the police station proper, which
seemed to consist of three uniformed officers sitting at
three desks,all ofthemtalking on the phone.
"I'm Alaska Young's brother," the Colonel announced
brazenly.
"And I want to talk to thecop who sawher die."
A pale, thin man with a reddish blond beard spoke
quickly into the phone and then hung up. "I seen 'er," he
said. "She hitmah cruiser."
"Canwetalk to you outside?"the Colonelasked.
"Canwetalk to you outside?"the Colonelasked.
"Yup."
The cop grabbed a coat and walked toward us, and as
he approached, I could see the blue veins through the
translucentskin of his face.
Foracop, he didn't seemto get out much. Once outside,
the Colonellitacigarette.
"You nineteen?"the cop asked. InAlabama, you can get married at eighteen (fourteen with Mom and Dad's
permission), but you haveto be nineteen to smoke.
"So fine me. I just need to knowwhat you saw."
"Ah most always work from six t' midnight, but I was
coverin' the graveyard shift. We got a call 'bout a
jackknifed truck, and I's only about a mile away, so I
headed over, and I'd just pulled up. I's still in mah
cruiser, and I seen out the corner a' my eye the
headlights, and my lights was on and I turned the siren
on, but the lights just keptcomin' straightat me, son, and
I got out quick and run offand she just barreled inta me.
I seen plenty, but I ain't never seen that. She didn't tarn.
She didn't brake. She jest hit it. I wa'n't more than ten
feet fromthe cruiser when she hit it. I thought I'd die, but
hereah am."
For the first time, the Colonel's theory seemed plausible.
She didn't hear thesiren? She didn'tseethelights? She was sober enough to kiss well, I thought. Surely she was
soberenough to swerve.
"Did you see her face before she hit the car? Was she
asleep?"the Colonelasked.
"That I cain't tell ya. I didn't see 'er. There wa'n't much
"That I cain't tell ya. I didn't see 'er. There wa'n't much
time."
"I understand. She was dead when you got to the car?"
heasked.
"I—I did everything I could. Ah run right up to her, but
the steerin' wheel—well, ah reached in there, thought if
ah could git thatsteerin' wheelloose, but there weren't no
gettin' her outta that car alive. It fairly well crushed her
chest, see."
I winced at theimage. "Did shesay anything?"Iasked.
"She was passed on, son," hesaid, shaking his head, and my last hope oflast words faded.
"Do you think it was an accident?"the Colonelasked as
I stood beside him, my shoulders slouching, wanting a
cigarette but nervous to beasaudaciousas him.
"Ah been an officer heretwenty-six years,and ah'veseen more drunks than you'n count, and ah ain't never seen
someone so drunk they cain't swerve. But ah don't
know. The coroner said it wasan accident, and maybe it was. That ain't my field, y'know. I s'pose that's 'tween
herand the Lord now."
"Howdrunk was she?"Iasked. "Like, did they test her?"
"Yeah. Her ball was point twenty-four. That's drunk,
certainly. That'sa powerful drunk."
"Was there anything in the car?" the Colonel asked.
"Anything, like, unusualthat you remember?"
"I remember them brochures from colleges—places in Maine and Ohia and Texas—I thought t' myself that girl must be fromCulver Crick and that was mighty sad, see
a girl like that lookin't' go t' college. That's a goddamned
a girl like that lookin't' go t' college. That's a goddamned
shame. And they's flowers. They was flowers in her
backseat. Like, fromaflorist. Tulips."
Tulips? I thought immediately of the tulips Jake had sent
her. "Weretheywhite?"Iasked.
"They sure was," the cop answered. Why would she
have taken his tulips with her? But the cop wouldn't have
an answer for that one.
"Ah hope y'all find out whatever y'all's lookin' for. I have
thought it over some, 'causeI never seen nothing likethat
before.Ah'vethought hard on it, wondered ifI'dastarted
up the cruiser real quick and drove it off, if she'da been
all right. There mightn't've been time. No knowing now. But it don't matter, t' my mind, whether it were an
accident or it weren't. It's a goddamned shame either way."
"There was nothing you could have done," the Colonel
said softly. "You did your job,and weappreciateit."
"Well. Thanks. Y'all go 'long now, and take care, and let me knowif ya haveany other questions. This is mah card
if you need anything."
The Colonel put the card in his fake leather wallet, and we walked toward home.
"Whitetulips,"I said. "Jake's tulips. Why?"
"One time last year, she and Takumi and I were at the
SmokingHole, and there was this little white daisy on the
bank of the creek, and all of a sudden she just jumped waist-deep into the water and waded across and
grabbed it. She put it behind her ear, and when I asked
her
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 66 of 88
about it, she told me that her parents always put white
flowers in her hair when she was little. Maybe she wanted to die withwhiteflowers."
"Maybeshe was going to return themto Jake,"I said.
"Maybe. But that cop just shit sure convinced me that it might have been asuicide."
"Maybe we should just let her be dead," I said,
frustrated. It seemed to methat nothingwe might find out would make anything any better, and I could not get the
image of the steering wheel careening into her chest out
of my mind, her chest "fairly well crushed" while she
sucked for a last breath that would never come, and no,
this was not making anything better. "What if she did do
it?"I asked the Colonel. "We're not any less guilty. All it
does is make her into thisawful, selfish bitch."
"Christ, Pudge. Do you even remember the person she
actuallywas? Do you remember how shecould be a
selfish bitch? That was part of her,and you used to know
it. It's like nowyou only careabout theAlaska youmade
up."
I sped up, walking ahead of the Colonel, silent. And he
couldn't know, because he wasn't the last person she
kissed, because he hadn't been left with an unkeepable
promise, because he wasn't me. Screw this, I thought,
and for the first time, I imagined just going back home,
ditching the Great Perhaps for the old comforts ofschool
friends. Whatever their faults, I'd never knownmy school
friends in Floridato die onme.
After a considerable distance, the Colonel jogged up to
After a considerable distance, the Colonel jogged up to me and said, "I just want it to be normalagain," he said.
"You and me. Normal.
Fun. Just, normal. And I feellikeifwe knew—"
"Okay, fine,"Icut himoff. "Fine. We'll keep looking."
The Colonelshook his head, but then he smiled. "I have
alwaysappreciated yourenthusiasm, Pudge. And I'mjust
going to go ahead and pretend you still have it until it
comes back. Nowlet's go homeand find out why people
offthemselves."
fourteen daysafter
warning signs of suicide the Colonel and I found on the Web:
Previous
suicide
attempts
Verbally
threatening
suicide
Giving
away
prized
possessions
Collecting and discussingmethods ofsuicide
Collecting and discussingmethods ofsuicide
Expressions of hopelessness and anger at oneselfand/or
the world
Writing, talking, reading, and drawing about death and/or
depression
Suggesting that the person would not be missed if s/he were gone
Self-injury
Recent loss of a friend or family member through death
or suicide
Sudden and dramatic declinein academic performance
Eating disorders, sleeplessness, excessive sleeping,
chronic headaches
Use(or increased use) ofmind-altering substances
Loss of interest in sex, hobbies, and other activities
previously enjoyed
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 67 of 88
Alaska displayed two of those warning signs. She had
lost, although not recently, her mother. And her drinking,
always pretty steady, had definitely increased in the last month of her life. She did talk about dying, but she
always seemed to beat least half kidding.
"I makejokesabout death all thetime,"the Colonelsaid.
"I made a joke last week about hanging myself with my
tie. And I'mnot gonna offmyself. So that doesn't count.
tie. And I'mnot gonna offmyself. So that doesn't count. And she didn't give anything away, and she sure as hell
didn't lose interest in sex. One would have to like sex an
awfullot to make out with your scrawny ass."
"Funny,"I said.
"I know. God, I'ma genius. And her grades were good. And I don't recall her talking about killing herself."
"Once, with the cigarettes, remember? 'You smoke to
enjoy it. I smoketo die.'"
"That was a joke."
But when prodded by the Colonel, maybe to prove to
himthat I could remember Alaska as she really was and
not just as I wanted her to be, I kept returning the
conversation to those times when she would be mean
and moody, when she didn't feel like answering how, when, why, who, or what questions. "She could seem
so angry," I thoughtaloud.
"What, and I can't?" the Colonel retorted. "I'm plenty
angry, Pudge. And you haven't been the picture of
placidity of late, either, and you aren't going to off
yourself. Wait,are you?"
"No," I said. And maybe it was only because Alaska
couldn't hit the brakes and I couldn't hit the accelerator. Maybe she just had an odd kind of courage that I
lacked, but no.
"Good to know. So yeah, she was up and down—from
fire and brimstone to smoke and ashes. But partly, this
yearat least, it was the whole Maryathing. Look, Pudge,
she obviously wasn't thinking about killing herself when
she was making out with you. After that, she was asleep
until the phone rang. So she decided to kill herself at
some point between that ringing phoneand crashing, or it
some point between that ringing phoneand crashing, or it wasan accident."
"But why wait until you're sixmiles offcampus to die?"I
asked.
He sighed and shook his head. "She did like being mysterious. Maybe she wanted it like this." I laughed
then,and the Colonelsaid,
"What?"
"I was just thinking— Why do you run head-on into a
cop car with its lights on? and then I thought, Weil, she
hated authorityfigures."
The Colonel laughed. "Hey, look at that. Pudge made a
funny!"
It feltalmost normal, and thenmy distancefromtheevent
itselfseemed to evaporateand I found myself back in the
gym, hearing the news for the first time, the Eagle's tears
dripping onto his pants, and I looked overat the Colonel
and thought of all the hours we'd spent on this foam
couch in the past two weeks—everything she'd ruined. Too pissed off to cry, I said, "This is only making me
hate her. I don't want to hate her.And what's the point, if
that's all it's makingme do?" Still refusing to answer how
and why questions. Stillinsisting on an aura ofmystery.
I leaned forward, head between my knees, and the Colonel placed a hand on my upper back. "The point is
that there are always answers, Pudge." And then he
pushed air out between his pursed lips and I could hear
the angry quiver in his voice as he repeated, "There are
always answers. We just have to be smart enough. The Web says that suicides usually involve carefully thoughtout plans. So clearly she did not commit suicide." I felt
embarrassed to bestillfalling apart two weeks later when
embarrassed to bestillfalling apart two weeks later when
the Colonelcould take his medicineso stoically, and I sat
up.
"Okay, fine"Ianswered. "It wasn'tsuicide."
"Although it sure doesn't make sense as an accident,"the Colonelsaid.
I laughed. "Wesureare making progress."
We were interrupted by Holly Moser, the senior I knew
primarily from viewing her nude self-portraits over ThanksgivingwithAlaska.
Holly hung with the Weekday Warriors, which explains why I'd previously said about two words to her in my
life, but she just came in without knocking and said that
she'd had a mysticalindicator ofAlaska's presence.
"I was in the Waffle House, and suddenly all the lights went off, except for, like, the light over my booth, which
started flashing. It would belike on forasecond and then
off for a while and then on for a couple of seconds and
then off.And I realized, you know, it wasAlaska. I think
she was trying to talk to me in Morse code. But, like, I
don't know Morse code. She probably didn't know that. Anyway, I thought you guys should know."
"Thanks,"I said curtly, and shestood fora while, looking
at us, her mouth opening as if to speak, but the Colonel was staring at her through half-closed eyes, his jaw
jutting out and his distaste uncontained. I understood
how he felt: I didn't believe in ghosts who used Morse
code to communicate with people they'd never liked. And I disliked the possibility that Alaska would give
someoneelse peace but notme.
"God, people like that shouldn't be allowed to live," he
"God, people like that shouldn't be allowed to live," he
said after sheleft.
"It was pretty stupid."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 68 of 88
"It's not just stupid, Pudge. I mean, as if Alaska would
talk to Holly Moser. God! I can't stand these fake
grievers. Stupid bitch."
I almost told him that Alaska wouldn't want him to call
any woman a bitch, but there was no usefightingwith the Colonel.
twenty daysafter
it was Sunday, and the Colonel and I decided against
the cafeteria for dinner, instead walking off campus and
across Highway 119 to the Sunny Konvenience Kiosk, where we indulged in a well-balanced meal of two
oatmeal cream pies apiece. Seven hundred calories. Enough energy to sustain a man for halfa day. Wesat on
the curb in front of the store, and I finished dinner in four
bites.
"I'mgoing to callJaketomorrow, just so you know. I got
his phone number fromTakumi."
"Fine,"I said.
I heard a bell jangle behind me and turned toward the
opening door.
"Y'all's loitering," said the woman who'd just sold us
dinner.
"We'reeating,"the Colonelanswered.
The woman shook her head and ordered, as if to a dog,
"Git."
So we walked behind the store and sat by the stinking,
fetid Dumpster.
"Enoughwith thefine's already, Pudge. That's ridiculous.
I'm going to call Jake, and I'm going to write down
everything he says, and then we're going to sit down
togetherand try and figure out what happened."
"No.You're on your ownwith that. I don't want to know
what happened between herand Jake."
The Colonel sighed and pulled a pack of Pudge Fund
cigarettes of his jeans pocket. "Why not?"
"Because I don't want to! Do I have provide youwith an
in-depth analysis ofevery decision I make?"
The Colonel lit thecigarette with alighter I'd paid forand
took a drag. "Whatever. It needs to be figured out, and I
need your help to do it, because between the two of us we knewher prettywell. So that's that."
I stood up and stared down at himsitting smugly, and he
blew a thin stream of smoke at my face, and I'd had
enough. "I'm tired of following orders, asshole! I'm not
going to sit with you and discuss the finer points of her
relationship with Jake, goddamn it. I can't say it any
clearer: / don't want to know about them. I already
know what she told me, and that's all I need to know,
and you can be a condescending prick as long as you'd
like, but I'm not going to sit around and chat with you
about how goddamned much she loved Jake! Now give me my cigarettes." The Colonel threw the pack on the
me my cigarettes." The Colonel threw the pack on the
ground and was up in aflash,afistful ofmy sweater in his
hand, trying but failing to pullme down to his height.
"You don't even care about her!" he shouted. "All that matters is you and your precious fucking fantasy that you
and Alaska had this goddamned secret love affair and
she was going to leave Jake for you and you'd live
happily ever after. But she kissed a lot of guys, Pudge. And ifshe were here, we both know that she would still
be Jake's girlfriend and that there'd be nothing but drama
between the two of you—not love, not sex, just you
pining after her and her like, 'You're cute, Pudge, but I
love Jake.' If she loved you so much, why did she leave
you that night?
And if you loved her so much, why'd you help her go? I was drunk. What's yourexcuse?"
The Colonel let go of my sweater, and I reached down
and picked up the cigarettes. Not screaming, not through
clenched teeth, not with the veins pulsing inmy forehead,
but calmly. Calmly. I looked down at the Colonel and
said, "Fuck you."
The vein-pulsing screaming camelater, after I had jogged
across Highway 119 and through the dorm circle and
across the soccer field and down the dirt road to the
bridge, when I found myself at the Smoking Hole. I
picked up a blue chair and threw it against the concrete wall, and theclang of plastic on concreteechoed beneath
the bridge as the chair fell limply on its side, and then I
lay onmy back withmy knees hanging over the precipice
and screamed. I screamed because the Colonel was a
self-satisfied, condescending bastard, and I screamed
because he was right, for I did want to believe that I'd
had a secret love affair with Alaska. Did she love me? Would she have left Jake for me? Or was it just another
impulsive Alaska moment? It was not enough to be the
impulsive Alaska moment? It was not enough to be the
last guy she kissed. I wanted to bethelast onesheloved. And I knew I wasn't. I knew it, and I hated her for it. I
hated her for notcaring about me. I hated her for leaving
that night, and I hated myself, too, not only because I let
her go but because if I had been enough for her, she wouldn't haveevenwanted to leave. She would havejust
lain with me and talked and cried, and I would have
listened and kissed at her tears as they pooled in her
eyes.
I turned my head and looked at one of the little blue
plastic chairs on its side. I wondered if there would ever
be a day when I didn't think about Alaska, wondered whether I should hope for a time when she would be a
distant memory—recalled only on the anniversary of her
death, or maybe a couple of weeks after, remembering
only after having forgotten.
I knew that I would know more dead people. The
bodies pile up. Could there beaspaceinmymemory for
each of them, or would I
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 69 of 88
forgetalittle ofAlaskaevery day for therest ofmy life?
Once, early on in the year, she and I had walked down
to the SmokingHole, and she jumped into Culver Creek with her flip-flops still on. She stepped across the creek,
picking her steps carefully over the mossy rocks, and
grabbed a waterlogged stick fromthe creek bank. As I
sat on the concrete, my feet dangling toward the water,
she overturned rocks with the stick and pointed out the
skittering crawfish.
"You boil 'em and then suck the heads out," she said
"You boil 'em and then suck the heads out," she said
excitedly.
"That's whereallthe good stuffis—the heads."
She taught me everything I knew about crawfish and
kissing and pink wineand poetry. She made me different.
I lit a cigarette and spit into the creek. "You can't just make me differentand then leave,"I said out loud to her.
"Because I was fine before, Alaska. I was fine with just me and last words and school friends, and you can't just make me different and then die." For she had embodied
the Great Perhaps—she had proved to me that it was worth it to leave behind my minor life for grander maybes, and now she was gone and with her my faith in
perhaps. I could calleverything the Colonelsaid and did
"fine." I could try to pretend that I didn't care anymore,
but it could never be true again. You can't just make
yourself matter and then die, Alaska, because now I am
irretrievably different, and I'msorry I let you go, yes, but
you made the choice. You left me Perhapsless, stuck in
your goddamned labyrinth. And now I don't even know
if you chose the straight and fast way out, if you left me
like this on purpose. And so I never knew you, did I? I
can't remember, becauseI never knew.
And as I stood up to walk home and make my peace with the Colonel, I tried to imagine her in thatchair, but I
could not remember whether she crossed her legs. I
could stillsee her smiling at me with half ofMona Lisa's
smirk, but Icouldn't picture her hands wellenough to see
her holding a cigarette. I needed, I decided, to really
know her, because I needed more to remember. Before
I could begin the shameful process of forgetting the how
and the why of her living and dying, I needed to learn it: How. Why. When. Where. What.
At Room 43, after quickly offered and accepted
At Room 43, after quickly offered and accepted
apologies, the Colonel said, "We've made a tactical
decision to push back calling Jake.
We're going to pursuesome otheravenues first."
twenty-one daysafter
as dr. hyde shuffled into class the next morning, Takumi
sat down next to me and wrote a note on the edge of his
notebook. Lunch at Mclnedible, it read.
I scribbled Okay on my own notebook and then turned
to a blank page as Dr. Hyde started talking about
Sufism, the mystical sect of Islam. I'd only scanned
through the reading—I'd been studying only enough not
to fail—but in my scanning, I'd come across great last words.
This poor Sufi dressed in rags walked into a jewelry
store owned by a richmerchantand asked him, "Do you
knowhowyou're going to die?"
The merchant answered, "No. No one knows how
they're going to die."And the Sufisaid, "I do."
"How?"asked the merchant.
And the Sufi lay down, crossed his arms, said, "Like
this," and died, whereupon the merchant promptly gave
up his store to live a life of poverty in pursuit of the kind
ofspiritualwealth the dead Sufi had acquired.
But Dr. Hyde was telling a different story, one that I'd
skipped. "Karl Marx famously called religion 'the opiate
ofthe masses.'
Buddhism, particularly as it is popularly practiced,
promises improvement through karma. Islam and
Christianity promise eternal paradise to the faithful. And
that is a powerful opiate, certainly, the hope of a better
life to come. But there's a Sufi story that challenges the
notion that people believe only because they need an
opiate. Rabe'a al-Adiwiyah, a great woman saint of
Sufism, was seen running through the streets of her
hometown, Basra, carrying a torch in one hand and a
bucket of water in the other. When someone asked her whatshe was doing, sheanswered,
'I am going to take this bucket of water and pour it on
theflames of hell, and then Iamgoing to usethis torch to
burn down the gates of paradise so that people will not
love God for want of heaven or fear of hell, but because Heis God.'"
Awoman so strong she burns heaven and drenches hell. Alaska would have liked this Rabe'a woman, I wrote
in my notebook. But even so, the afterlife mattered to me. Heaven and hell and reincarnation. As much as I wanted to know how Alaska had died, I wanted to
know where she was now, if anywhere. I liked to
imagine her looking down on us, stillaware of us, but it
seemed likeafantasy,and I never really felt it—
just as the Colonel had said at the funeral that she wasn't
there, wasn'tanywhere. Icouldn't honestly imagine heras
anything but dead, her body rotting in Vine Station, the
rest of her just a ghost alive only in our remembering. Like Rabe'a, I didn't think people should believe in God
because of heaven and hell. But I didn't feela need to run
around with a torch. You can't burn down a made-up
place.
After class, as Takumi picked through his fries at Mclnedible, eating only the crunchiest, I felt the total loss
of her, still reeling from the idea that she was not only
gonefromthis world but fromall ofthem.
gonefromthis world but fromall ofthem.
"Howhave you been?"Iasked.
"Uh,"hesaid,a mouth full offries, "nan good. You?"
"Not good." I took a bite of cheeseburger. I'd gotten a
plastic stock car with my Happy Meal, and it sat
overturned on thetable. I spun the wheels.
"I miss her,"Takumi said, pushing away his tray,
uninterested in theremaining soggy fries.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 70 of 88
"Yeah. I do, too. I'msorry, Takumi,"and I meant it in the
largest possible way. I was sorry we ended up like this,
spinning wheels at a McDonald's. Sorry the person who
had brought us together now lay dead between us. I was
sorry I let her die. Sorry I haven't talked to you
because you couldn't know the truth about the Colonel and me, and I hated being around you and
having to pretend that my grief is this uncomplicated
thing—pretending that she died and I miss her
instead of that she died because of me.
"Metoo. You're not datingLaraanymore,are you?"
"I don't think so."
"Okay. She was kind ofwondering."
I had been ignoring her, but by then she had begun to
ignore me back, so I figured it was over, but maybe not.
"Well,"I told Takumi,
"I just can't—I don't know, man. That's pretty
"I just can't—I don't know, man. That's pretty
complicated."
"Sure. She'll understand. Sure. All good."
"Okay."
"Listen, Pudge. I—ah, I don't know. Itsucks, huh?"
"Yeah."
twenty-seven daysafter
six DAYS LATER four Sundays after the last Sunday,
the Colonel and I were trying to shoot each other with
paintball guns whileturning 900s in a half pipe. "We need
booze. And we need to borrow the Eagle's Breathalyzer."
"Borrow it? Do you knowwhereit is?"
"Yeah. He's never made you take one?"
"Urn. No. Hethinks I'ma nerd."
"You area nerd, Pudge. But you're not gonnaleta detail
like that keep you from drinking." Actually, I hadn't
drunk since that night, and didn't feel particularly inclined
to ever takeit up everagain.
Then I nearly elbowed the Colonel in the face, swinging my arms wildly as ifcontortingmy body in the right ways mattered as much as pressing theright buttonsat theright moments—the same video-game-playing delusion that
had always gripped Alaska. But the Colonel was so
focused on the game he didn'teven notice. "Do you have
a plan for how, exactly, we're going to steal the Breathalyzer frominsidethe Eagle's house?"
The Colonel looked over at me and said, "Do you suck
The Colonel looked over at me and said, "Do you suck
at this game?" and then, without turning back to the
screen, shot my skater in the balls with a blue paint blast.
"But first, we gotta get some liquor, because the
ambrosia's sourand my boozeconnection is—"
"POOF. Gone,"I finished.
When I opened his door, Takumiwas sitting at his desk,
boxy headphones surrounding his entire head, bouncing
his head to the beat. He seemed oblivious to us. "Hey,"I
said. Nothing. "Takumi!" Nothing. "TAKUMI!" He
turned around and pulled off his headphones. Iclosed the
door behind meand said, "You gotany alcohol?"
"Why?"heasked.
"Uh, because we want to get drunk?" the Colonel
answered.
"Great. I'lljoin you."
"Takumi,"the Colonelsaid. "This is—we need to do this
alone."
"No. I've had enough of that shit." Takumi stood up, walked into his bathroom, and came out with a Gatorade
bottle filled with clear liquid. "I keep it in the medicine
cabinet,"Takumisaid. "On account of howit's medicine." He pocketed the bottleand thenwalked out oftheroom,
leaving the door open behind him. A moment later, he
peeked his head back in and, brilliantly mimicking the Colonel's bossy bass voice,
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 71 of 88
said, "Christ, you comin' or what?"
"Takumi," the Colonel said. "Okay. Look, what we're
doing is a little dangerous, and I don't want you caught
up in it. Honestly. But, listen, we'll tell you everything
starting tomorrow."
"I'mtired ofallthis secretshit. She was my friend, too."
"Tomorrow. Honestly."
He pulled the bottle out of his pocket and tossed it to me.
"Tomorrow,"hesaid.
"I don't really want him to know," I said as we walked
back to the room, the Gatorade bottle stuffed in the
pocket ofmy sweatshirt.
"He'll hate us."
"Yeah, well, he'll hate us more if we keep pretending he
doesn'texist,"the Colonelanswered.
Fifteenminutes later, I stood at the Eagle's doorstep.
He opened the door with a spatula in hand, smiled, and
said, "Miles, come in. I was just making an egg
sandwich. Want one?"
"No thanks,"I said, following the Eagleinto his kitchen.
My job was to keep himout of his living roomfor thirty
seconds so the Colonel could get the Breathalyzer
undetected. Icoughed loudly to let the Colonel knowthe
coast was clear. The Eagle picked up his egg sandwich
and took a bite. "To what do I owe the pleasure of your
visit?"heasked.
"I just wanted to tell you that the Colonel—I mean, Chip
"I just wanted to tell you that the Colonel—I mean, Chip Martin—he's my roommate, you know, he's having a
tough timeinLatin."
"Well, he's not attending the class, from what I
understand, which can make it very difficult to learn the
language." He walked toward me. I coughed again, and
backpedaled, the Eagle and I tangoing our way toward
his living room.
"Right, well, he's up all night every night thinking about Alaska," I said, standing up straight and tall, trying to
block the Eagle's view of the living roomwith my nonetoo-wideshoulders. "Theywere very close, you know."
"I know that—" he said, and in the living room, the Colonel's sneakers squeaked against the hardwood floor. The Eaglelooked atme quizzically and sidestepped me. I
quickly said, "Is that burner on?"and pointed toward the
frying pan.
The Eagle wheeled around, looked at the clearly not-on
burner, then dashed into theliving room.
Empty. Heturned back to me. "Are you up to something, Miles?"
"No, sir. Honestly. I just wanted to talk about Chip."
He arched his eyebrows, skeptical. "Well, I understand
that this is a devastating loss for Alaska's close friends.
It's justawful. There's no comfort to this grief, is there?"
"No sir."
"I'm sympathetic to Chip's troubles. But school is
important. Alaska would have wanted, I'm sure, for Chip's studies to continue unimpeded."
I'm sure, I thought. I thanked the Eagle,and he promised me an egg sandwich at some point in the future, which made me nervous that he would just show up at our
roomone afternoonwith an egg sandwich in hand to find
us A. illegally smokingwhilethe ColonelB. illegally drank milk and vodka out ofa gallon jug.
Halfway across the dorm circle, the Colonel ran up to me. "That was smooth, with the'Is that burner on?' If you
hadn't pulled that, I was toast. Although I guess I'll have
to start going to Latin. Stupid Latin."
"Did you get it?"Iasked.
"Yeah," he said. "Yeah. God, I hope he doesn't go
looking for it tonight. Although, really, he could never
suspect anything. Why would someonesteal a Breathalyzer?"
At two o'clock in the morning, the Colonel took his sixth
shot of vodka, grimaced, then frantically motioned with
his hand toward the bottle of Mountain Dew I was
drinking. I handed it to him,and hetook along pull on it.
"I don't think I'll be able to go to Latin tomorrow," he
said. His words were slightly slurred, as if his tongue wereswollen.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 72 of 88
"One more,"I pleaded.
"Okay. This is it, though."He poured a sip of vodka into
a Dixiecup, swallowed, pursed his lips, and squeezed his
hands into tight little fists. "OhGod, this is bad. It's so much better withmilk. This better be point two-four."
much better withmilk. This better be point two-four."
"We have to wait for fifteen minutes after your last drink
before we test it,"I said, having downloaded instructions
for the Breathalyzer offtheInternet. "Do you feel drunk?"
"If drunk werecookies, I'd be Famous Amos."
We laughed. "Chips Ahoy! would have been funnier," I
said.
"Forgive me. Notatmy best."
I held the Breathalyzer inmy hand, a sleek, silver gadget
about the size of a small remote control. Beneath an LCD screen was a small hole. I blew into it to test it:
0.00, it read. I figured it was working.
After fifteen minutes, I handed it to the Colonel. "Blow
really hard onto it forat least two seconds,"I said.
He looked up at me. "Is that what you told Lara in the TV room? Because, see, Pudge, they only call it a blow
job."
"Shut up and blow,"I said.
His cheeks puffed out, the Colonel blew into the hole
hard and long, his faceturning red.
.16. "Oh no,"the Colonelsaid. "OhGod."
"You're two-thirds of the way there," I said
encouragingly.
"Yeah, but I'mlikethree-fourths ofthe way to puking."
"Well, obviously it's possible. She did it. C'mon! You can
outdrink a girl,can't you?"
"Give methe MountainDew,"hesaid stoically.
And then I heard footsteps outside. Footsteps. We'd waited till 1:00 to turn on the lights, figuring everyone would be long asleep—it was a school night after all—
but footsteps, shit, and as the Colonel looked at me
confused, I grabbed the Breathalyzer from him and
stuffed it between the foam cushions of the couch and
grabbed the Dixie cup and the Gatorade bottle of vodka
and stashed thembehind the COFFEE
TABLE, and in one motion I grabbed a cigarette froma
pack and lit it, hoping thesmell ofsmoke would cover up
thesmell of booze. I puffed the cigarette without inhaling,
trying to smoke up the room, and I was almost back to
the couch when the three quick knocks came against the
door and the Colonel looked at me, his eyes wide, his
suddenly unpromising future flashing before his eyes, and
I whispered, "Cry,"as the Eagleturned the knob.
The Colonel hunched forward, his head between his
knees and his shoulders shaking, and I put my arm
around himas the Eaglecamein.
"I'm sorry," I said before the Eagle could say anything.
"He's having atough night."
"Are you smoking?" the Eagle asked. "In your room? Four hours after lights-out?"
I dropped the cigarette into a half-empty Coke can. "I'm
sorry, sir. I'mjust trying to stay awake with him."
The Eagle walked up toward the couch, and I felt the Colonelstart to rise, but I held his shoulders down firmly,
because if the Eagle smelled the Colonel's breath we were donefor sure. "Miles,"the Eaglesaid. "I understand
that this isa difficult timefor you. But youwillrespect the
that this isa difficult timefor you. But youwillrespect the
rules of this school, or you will matriculate someplace
else. I'llsee you in Jury tomorrow. Is thereanything Ican
do for you, Chip?"
Without looking up, the Colonelanswered in a quivering,
tear-soaked voice, "No, sir. I'mjust glad I have Miles."
"Well, I am, too," the Eagle said. "Perhaps you should
encourage himto live within theconfines of our rules, lest
herisk his place on thiscampus."
"Yessir,"the Colonelsaid.
"Y'allcan leave your lights on until you're ready to go to
bed. I'llsee you tomorrow, Miles."
"Good night, sir," I said, imagining the Colonel sneaking
the Breathalyzer back into the Eagle's house while I got
harangued at Jury. As the Eagle closed the door behind
him, the Colonelshot up, smiling at me, and still nervous
that the Eagle might be outside, whispered, "That was a
thing of beauty."
"I learned fromthe best,"I said. "Nowdrink."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 73 of 88
An hour later, the Gatorade bottle mostly empty, the Colonel hit. 24.
"Thank you, Jesus!" he exclaimed, and then added, "This
isawful. This is not fun drunk."
I got up and cleared the COFFEE TABLE out of the way so the Colonel could walk the length of the room
without hitting any obstacles, and said, "Okay, can you
without hitting any obstacles, and said, "Okay, can you
stand?"
The Colonel pushed his arms into the foamof the couch
and began to rise, but then fell backward onto thecouch,
lying on his back.
"Spinning room,"he observed. "Gonna puke."
"Don't puke. That willruin everything."
I decided to give hima field sobriety test, like the cops
do. "Okay. Get over here and try to walk a straight line." He rolled off the couch and fell to the floor, and I caught
himbeneath hisarmpitsand held himup. I positioned him
in between two tiles ofthelinoleumfloor.
"Follow that line of tiles. Walk straight, toe to heel." He
raised oneleg and immediately leaned to theleft, hisarms windmilling. He took a single unsteady step, sort of a waddle, as his feet wereseemingly unableto land directly
in front of each other. He regained his balance briefly,
then took a step backward and landed on the couch. "I
fail,"hesaid matter-of-factly.
"Okay, how's your depth perception?"
"Mywhat perwhatshun?"
"Look at me. Is there one of me? Are there two of me? Could you accidentally drive into me if I were a cop
car?"
"Everything's very spinny, but I don't think so. This is
bad. Was shereally likethis?"
"Apparently. Could you drivelikethis?"
"OhGod no. No. No. She was really drunk, huh."
"Yeah."
"We werereally stupid."
"Yeah."
"I'mspinning. But no. No cop car. Ican see."
"So there's yourevidence."
"Maybeshefellasleep. I feelawfully sleepy."
"We'll find out," I said, trying to play the role that the Colonel had always played for me.
"Not tonight," he answered. "Tonight, we're gonna throw
up a little, and then we are going to sleep through our
hangover."
"Don't forgetabout Latin."
"Right. FuckingLatin."
twenty-eight daysafter
the colonel made it to Latin the next morning—"I feel
awesome right now, because I'm still drunk. But God
help mein acouple of hours"—
and I took a French test for which I had studied un petit
peu. I did all right on the multiple choice (which-verbtense-makes-sense-here type questions), but the essay
question, In Le Petit Prince, what is the significance of
therose? threwmea bit.
Had I read The Little Prince in English or French, I
suspect this question might have been quite easy. Unfortunately, I'd spent the evening getting the Colonel
drunk. So I answered, Elle symbolise I'amour ("It
drunk. So I answered, Elle symbolise I'amour ("It
symbolizes love"). Madame O'Malley had left us with an
entire page to answer the question, but I figured I'd
covered it nicely in three words.
I'd kept up in my classes well enough to get B-minuses
and not worry my parents, but I didn't really care much
anymore. Thesignificance of the rose? I thought. Who
gives a shit? What's the significance of the white
tulips? There wasa questionworth answering.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 74 of 88
After I'd gotten a lecture and ten work hours at Jury, I
came back to Room 43 to find the Colonel telling Takumi everything—well, everything except the kiss. I walked in to the Colonelsaying, "So we helped her go."
"You set offthefireworks,"hesaid.
"How'd you knowabout thefireworks?"
"I've been doing a bit ofinvestigating,"Takumianswered.
"Well, anyway, that was dumb. You shouldn't have done
it. But we all let her go, really," he said, and I wondered what the hell he meant by that, but I didn't have time to
ask before hesaid to me, "So you think it was suicide?"
"Maybe,"I said. "I don't see how she could have hit the
cop by accident unless she wasasleep."
"Maybe she was going to visit her father," Takumi said.
"Vine Station is on the way."
"Maybe,"I said. "Everything'sa maybe, isn't it?"
The Colonel reached in his pocket for a pack of
The Colonel reached in his pocket for a pack of
cigarettes. "Well, here'sanother one:MaybeJake has the
answers," he said. "We've exhausted other strategies, so
I'mcalling himtomorrow, okay?"
I wanted answers now, too, but not to some questions.
"Yeah, okay," I said. "But listen—don't tell me anything
that's not relevant. I don't want to know anything unless
it's going to help me know where she was going and why."
"Me neither, actually," Takumi said. "I feel like maybe
some ofthatshitshould stay private."
The Colonel stuffed a towel under the door, lit a
cigarette, and said, "Fair enough, kids. We'll work on a
need-to-knowbasis."
twenty-nine days after
as I WALKED HOME from classes the next day, I
saw the Colonel sitting on the bench outside the pay
phone, scribbling into a notebook balanced on his knees
as hecradled the phone between hisearand shoulder.
I hurried into Room 43, where I found Takumi playing
the racing game on mute. "How long has he been on the
phone?"Iasked.
"Dunno. He was onwhen I got here twentyminutes ago. He must have skipped Smart Boy Math. Why, are you
scared Jake's gonna drive down here and kick your ass
for letting her go?"
"Whatever," I said, thinking, This is precisely why we
shouldn't have told him. I walked into the bathroom,
turned on the shower, and lita cigarette. Takumicame in
not long after.
"What's up?"hesaid.
"Nothing. I just want to knowwhat happened to her."
"Like you really want to know the truth? Or like you want to find out that she fought with himand was on her way to break up with himand was going to come back
here and fall into your arms and youwere going to make
hot, sweet love and have genius babies who memorized
last words and poetry?"
"If you're pissed atme, justsay so."
"I'mnot pissed at you for letting her go. But I'mtired of
you acting like you were the only guy who ever wanted
her. Like you had some monopoly on liking her,"Takumi
answered. I stood up, lifted the toilet seat, and flushed my unfinished cigarette.
I stared at himfora moment, and then said, "I kissed her
that night,and I've gota monopoly on that."
"What?"hestammered.
"I kissed her."
His mouth opened as ifto speak, but hesaid nothing. We
stared at each other for a while, and I felt ashamed of myself for what amounted to bragging, and finally I said,
"I—look, you know how she was. She wanted to do
something, and she did it. I was probably just the guy who happened to bethere."
"Yeah. Well, I was never that guy," he said. "I—well,
Pudge, God knows Ican't blame you."
"Don't tellLara."
He was nodding as we heard the three quick knocks on
He was nodding as we heard the three quick knocks on
the front door that meant the Eagle, and I thought, Shit,
caught twice in a week, and Takumi pointed into the
shower, and so we jumped in together and pulled the
curtain shut, the too-low showerhead spitting water onto
us fromrib cage down. Forced to stand closer together
than seemed entirely necessary, we stayed there, silent,
the sputtering shower slowly soaking our T-shirts and
jeans for a few long minutes, while we waited for the
steamto lift thesmokeinto the vents. But the Eagle never
knocked on the bathroom door, and eventually Takumi
turned off the shower. I opened the bathroom door a
crack and peeked out to see the Colonel sitting on the
foam couch, his feet propped up on the COFFEE
TABLE, finishing Takumi's NASCARrace. I opened the
door and Takumi and I walked out, fully clothed and
drippingwet.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 75 of 88
"Well, there's something you don't see every day," the Colonelsaid nonchalantly.
"What the hell?"Iasked.
"I knocked like the Eagle to scare you."He smiled. "But
shit, if y'all need privacy, just leave a note on the door
next time."
Takumi and I laughed, and then Takumi said, "Yeah,
Pudge and I were getting a little testy, but man, ever
since we showered together, Pudge, I feel really close to
you."
"So how'd it go?"I asked. I sat down on the COFFEE
TABLE, and Takumi plopped down on the couch next
TABLE, and Takumi plopped down on the couch next
to the Colonel, both of us wetand vaguely cold but more
concerned with the Colonel's talk with Jake than with
getting dry.
"It was interesting. Here's what you need to know: He
gave her thoseflowers, like wethought. They didn't fight. He just called because he had promised to call at the
exact moment of their eight-month anniversary, which
happened to be three-oh-two in the A.M., which—let's
agree—is a little ridiculous, and I guess somehow she
heard the phoneringing. So they talked about nothing for
like five minutes, and then completely out of nowhere,
shefreaked out."
"Completely out of nowhere?"Takumiasked.
"Allow me to consult my notes." The Colonel flipped
through his notebook. "Okay. Jakesays, 'Did you havea
nice anniversary?' and then Alaska says, "I had a
splendid anniversary,'"and I could hear in the Colonel's
reading the excitement of her voice, the way she leaped
onto certain words likesplendid and fantastic and
absolutely.
"Then it's quiet, then Jake says, 'What are you doing?'
and Alaska says, 'Nothing, just doodling,' and then she
says, 'Oh God.' And then she says, 'Shit shit shit' and
starts sobbing, and told himshe had to go but she'd talk
to himlater, butshe didn'tsay she was driving to see him,
and Jake doesn't think she was. He doesn't know where
she was going, but he says she alwaysasked ifshe could
come up and see him,and she didn'task, so she must not
have been coming. Hold on, lemme find the quote." He
flipped a page in the notebook. "Okay, here: "She said
she'd talk to melater, not thatshe'd see me.'"
"She tells me 'To be continued' and tells himshe'll talk to
himlater,"I observed.
himlater,"I observed.
"Yes. Noted. Planning for a future. Admittedly
inconsistent with suicide. So then she comes back into
her roomscreaming about forgetting something. And then
her headlong race comes to its end. So no answers,
really."
"Well, we knowwhereshe wasn't going."
"Unless she was feeling particularly impulsive," Takumi
said. He looked at me. "And from the sound of things,
she was feeling rather impulsivethat night."
The Colonellooked overatmecuriously,and I nodded.
"Yeah,"Takumisaid. "I know."
"Okay, then. And you were pissed, but then you took a
shower with Pudge and it's all good. Excellent. So, so
that night..."the Colonelcontinued.
And we tried to resurrect the conversation that last night
as best we could for Takumi, but neither of us
remembered it terribly well, partly because the Colonel was drunk and I wasn't paying attention untilshe brought
up Truth or Dare. And, anyway, we didn't know how much it might mean. Last words are always harder to
remember when no one knows that someone's about to
die.
"I mean,"the Colonelsaid, "I think sheand I weretalking
about how much I adored skateboarding on the
computer but howit would nevereven occur to meto try
and step on a skateboard in real life, and then she said,
"Let's playTruth or Dare' and then you fucked her."
"Wait, you fucked her?In front of the Colonel?" Takumicried.
"I didn't fuck her."
"Calm down, guys," the Colonel said, throwing up his
hands. "It'saeuphemism."
"For what?"Takumiasked.
"Kissing."
"Brilliant euphemism." Takumi rolled his eyes. "AmI the
only one who thinks thatmight besignificant?"
"Yeah, that never occurred to me before,"I deadpanned.
"But now I don't know. She didn't tell Jake. It couldn't
have been that important."
"Maybeshe was racked with guilt,"hesaid.
"Jake said she seemed normal on the phone before she
freaked out," the Colonel said. "But it must have been
that phonecall.
Something happened that we aren't seeing." The Colonel
ran his hands through his thick hair, frustrated. "Christ,
something. Something inside of her. And now we just
haveto figure out what that was."
"So we just have to read the mind of a dead person," Takumisaid. "Easy enough."
"Precisely. Want to getshitfaced?"the Colonelasked.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 76 of 88
"I don't feellike drinking,"I said.
The Colonelreached into thefoamrecesses ofthe couch
and pulled out Takumi's Gatorade bottle. Takumi didn't want any either, but the Colonel just smirked and said,
"Morefor me,"and chugged.
thirty-seven days after
the next Wednesday, I ran into Lara after religion class —literally. I'd seen her, of course. I'd seen her almost
every day—in English or sitting in the library whispering
to her roommate, Katie. I saw her at lunch and dinner at
the cafeteria, and I probably would have seen her at
breakfast, ifI'd ever gotten up for it.And surely, shesaw me as well, but we hadn't, until that morning, looked at
each other simultaneously.
By now, Iassumed she'd forgottenme.Afterall, we only
dated for about a day, albeit an eventful one. But when I
plowed right into her left shoulder as I hustled toward
precalc, she spun around and looked up at me. Angry,
and not because of the bump. "I'msorry,"I blurted out,
and she just squinted at me like someone about to either
fight or cry, and disappeared silently into a classroom.
First two words I'd said to her in a month.
I wanted to want to talk to her. I knew I'd been awful—
Imagine, I kept tellingmyself, if you were Lara, with a
dead friend and a silent ex-boyfriend—but I only had
roomfor onetrue want, and she was dead, and I wanted
to knowthe howand why ofit,and Laracouldn't tellme,
and that wasallthatmattered.
forty-five daysafter
for weeks, the Colonel and I had relied on charity to
support our cigarette habit—we'd gotten free or cheap
packs fromeveryone fromMolly Tan to the once-crewcutted Longwell Chase. It was as if people wanted to
cutted Longwell Chase. It was as if people wanted to
help and couldn't think ofa better way. But by theend of
February, we ran out of charity. Just as well, really. I
never felt right taking people's gifts, because they did not
know that we'd loaded the bullets and put the gun in her
hand.
So after our classes, Takumi drove us to Coosa "We Cater to Your Spiritual Needs" Liquors. That afternoon, Takumiand I had learned the disheartening results of our
first major precalc test of the semester. Possibly because Alaska was no longer available to teach us precalc over
a pile of Mclnedible french fries and possibly because
neither of us had really studied, we were both in danger
of getting progress reports sent home.
"Thething is that I just don't find precalc very interesting," Takumisaid matter-of-factly.
"It might be hard to explain that to the director of
admissionsat Harvard,"the Colonelresponded.
"I don't know,"I said. "I find it pretty compelling."
And we laughed, but the laughs drifted into a thick,
pervasivesilence, and I knewwe wereall thinking of her,
dead and laughless, cold, no longerAlaska. Theideathat Alaska didn't exist still stunned me every time I thought
about it. She's rotting underground in Vine Station, Alabama, I thought, but even that wasn't quite it. Her
bodywas there, butshe was nowhere, nothing, POOF.
The times that were the most fun seemed always to be
followed by sadness now, because it was when life
started to feel like it did when she was with us that we
realized howutterly, totally goneshe was.
I bought the cigarettes. I'd neverentered Coosa Liquors,
but it wasevery bitas desolateasAlaska described. The
but it wasevery bitas desolateasAlaska described. The
dusty wooden floor creaked as I made my way to the
counter, and I saw a large barrel filled with brackish water that purported to contain LIVE BAIT, but in fact
contained a veritable school of dead, floating minnows. The woman behind the counter smiled at me with allfour
of her teeth when I asked her for a carton of Marlboro Lights.
"You go t' Culver Creek?"she asked me, and I did not
know whether to answer truthfully, since no high-school
student was likely to be nineteen, but she grabbed the
carton of cigarettes from beneath her and put it on the
counter without asking for an ID, so I said, "Yes, ma'am."
"How's school?"sheasked.
"Pretty good,"Ianswered.
"Heard y'all had a death up there."
"Yes'm,"I say.
"I'sawfulsorry t' hear it."
"Yes'm."
The woman, whose name I did not know because this was not the sort of commercial establishment to waste money on name tags, had
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 77 of 88
one long, white hair growing from a mole on her left
cheek. It wasn't disgusting, exactly, but I couldn't stop
glancing at itand then looking away.
Back in the car, I handed a pack of cigarettes to the Colonel.
We rolled down the windows, although the February
cold bitat my face and the loud wind made conversation
impossible. I sat in my quarter of the car and smoked, wondering why the old woman at Coosa Liquors didn't
just pull that one hair out of her mole. The wind blew
through Takumi's rolled-downwindowin front ofmeand
against my face. I scooted to the middle of the backseat
and looked up at the Colonelsitting shotgun, smiling, his
faceturned to the wind blowing in through his window.
forty-six daysafter
I DIDN'TWANTTOTALKTOLARA, but the next
day at lunch, Takumi pulled the ultimate guilt trip. "How
do you thinkAlaska would feelabout this shit?" heasked
as he stared across the cafeteria at Lara. She was sitting
three tables away from us with her roommate, Katie, who was telling some story, and Lara smiled whenever Katielaughed at one of her own jokes. Larascooped up
a forkful of canned corn and held it above her plate, moving her mouth to it and bowing her head toward her
lap as shetook the bitefromthefork—a quieteater.
"Shecould talk to me," I told Takumi.
Takumi shook his head. His open mouth gooey with mashed potatoes, he said, "Yuh ha' to." He swallowed.
"Let meask you a question, Pudge. When you're old and
gray and your grandchildren are sitting on your knee and
look up at you and say, 'Grandpappy, who gave you
your first blow job?' do you want to have to tell themit was some girl you spent the rest of high school ignoring? No!"He smiled. "Youwant to say, 'My dear friend Lara Buterskaya. Lovely girl. Prettier than your grandma by a wide margin.'"I laughed. So yeah, okay. I had to talk to
wide margin.'"I laughed. So yeah, okay. I had to talk to Lara.
After classes, I walked over to Lara's room and
knocked, and then she stood in the doorway, looking
like, What? What now? You've done the damage you
could, Pudge, and I looked past her, into the room I'd
only entered once, where I learned that kissing or no, I
couldn't talk to her—and beforethesilencecould get too
uncomfortable, I talked. "I'msorry,"I said.
"For what?" she asked, still looking toward me but not
quiteatme.
"For ignoring you. Foreverything,"I said.
"You deedn't have to be my boyfriend." She looked so
pretty, her big eyes blinking fast, her cheeks soft and
round, and still the roundness could only remind me of Alaska's thin face and her high cheekbones. But I could
live with it—and, anyway, I had to. "You could have just
beenmy friend,"shesaid.
"I know. I screwed up. I'msorry."
"Don't forgive that asshole," Katie cried from inside the
room.
"I forgeeve you." Lara smiled and hugged me, her hands
tight around the small of my back. I wrapped my arms
around her shouldersand smelled violets in her hair.
"I don't forgive you," Katie said, appearing in the
doorway. And although Katie and I were not well
acquainted, she felt comfortable enough to knee me in
the balls. She smiled then, and as I crumpled into a bow, Katiesaid, "NowI forgive you."
Lara and I took a walk to the lake—sans Katie—and
Lara and I took a walk to the lake—sans Katie—and we talked. We talked—aboutAlaska and about the past month, about how she had to miss me and miss Alaska, whileI only had to missAlaska(whichwas trueenough).
I told her as much of the truth as I could, from the
firecrackers to the Pelham Police Department and the whitetulips.
"I loved her," I said, and Lara said she loved her, too,
and I said,
"I know, but that's why. I loved her, and after she died I
couldn't think about anything else. It felt, like, dishonest. Likecheating."
"That's nota good reason,"shesaid.
"I know,"Ianswered.
She laughed softly. "Well, good then. As long as you
know."I knewI wasn't going to erase thatanger, but we weretalking.
As darkness spread that evening, the frogs croaked and
a few newly resurrected insects buzzed about campus,
and the four of us—Takumi, Lara, the Colonel, and I—
walked through the cold gray light of a full moon to the
SmokingHole.
"Hey, Colonel, why do you calleet the Smoking Hole?" Laraasked. "Eet's, like,atunnel."
"It's like fishing hole," the Colonel said. "Like, if we
fished, we'd fish here. But we smoke. I don't know. I
think Alaska named it." The Colonel pulled a cigarette
out of his pack and threwit into the water.
"What the hell?"Iasked.
"For her,"hesaid.
"For her,"hesaid.
I halfsmiled and followed his lead, throwing in acigarette
of my own. I handed Takumi and Lara cigarettes, and
they followed suit.
Thesmokes bounced and danced in thestreamforafew moments,and then they floated out ofsight.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 78 of 88
I was not religious, but I liked rituals. I liked the idea of
connecting an action with remembering. In China, the Old Man had told us, there are days reserved for grave
cleaning, where you make gifts to the dead. And I
imagined that Alaska would want a smoke, and so it
seemed to me that the Colonel had begun an excellent
ritual.
The Colonel spit into the stream and broke the silence.
"Funny thing, talking to ghosts," he said. "You can't tell if
you're making up their answers or if they are really
talking to you."
"I say we make a list," Takumi said, steering clear of
introspective talk. "What kind of proof do we have of
suicide?" The Colonel pulled out his omnipresent
notebook.
"She never hit the brakes,"I said,and the Colonelstarted
scribbling.
And she was awfully upset about something, although
she'd been awfully upset withoutcommitting suicide many
times before. We considered that maybe the flowers were some kind of memorial to herself—like a funeral
were some kind of memorial to herself—like a funeral
arrangement or something. But that didn't seem very Alaskan to us. She was cryptic, sure, but if you're going
to plan your suicide down to the flowers, you probably
have a plan as to how you're actually going to die, and Alaska had no way of knowing a policecar was going to
present itself on I-65 for the occasion.
And theevidencesuggesting an accident?
"She was really drunk, so she could have thought she wasn't going to hit the cop, although I don't know how," Takumisaid.
"Shecould havefallen asleep,"Lara offered.
"Yeah, we've thought about that," I said. "But I don't
think you keep driving straight if you fallasleep."
"I can't think of a way to find out that does not put our
lives in considerable danger," the Colonel deadpanned.
"Anyway, she didn't show warning signs of suicide. I mean, she didn't talk about wanting to die or give away
her stuff oranything."
"That's two. Drunk and no plans to die," Takumi said. This wasn't going anywhere. Just a different dance with
the same question. What we needed wasn't more
thinking. We needed moreevidence.
"We have to find out where she was going,"the Colonel
said.
"Thelast peopleshetalked to were me, you,and Jake,"I
said to him. "And we don't know. So howthe hellare we
going to find out?"
Takumi looked over at the Colonel and sighed. "I don't
think it would help, to knowwhereshe was going. I think
that would makeit worsefor us. Justa gut feeling."
that would makeit worsefor us. Justa gut feeling."
"Well, my gut wants to know," Lara said, and only then
did I realize what Takumimeant the day we'd showered
together—I may have kissed her, but I really didn't have
a monopoly on Alaska; the Colonel and I weren't the
only ones who cared about her, and weren't alone in
trying to figure out howshe died and why.
"Well, regardless," said the Colonel, "we're at a dead
end. So one of you think of something to do. Because
I'mout ofinvestigativetools."
Heflicked hiscigarette butt into thecreek, stood up, and
left. We followed him. Even in defeat, he was still the Colonel.
fifty-one days after
the investigation stalled, I took to reading for religion
classagain, which seemed to pleasethe Old Man, whose
pop quizzes I'd been failing consistently for a solid six weeks. We had one that Wednesdaymorning: Share an
example of a Buddhist koan. A koan is like a riddle
that's supposed to help you toward enlightenment in Zen Buddhism. For my answer, I wrote about this guy Banzan. He was walking through the market one day when he overheard someone ask a butcher for his best
piece of meat. The butcher answered, "Everything in my
shop is the best.
You cannot find a piece of meat that is not the best." Upon hearing this, Banzan realized that there is no best
and no worst, that those judgments have no realmeaning
because there is only what is, and poof, he reached
enlightenment. Reading it the night before, I'd wondered
ifit would belikethat for me—ifin one moment, I would
finally understand her, know her, and understand the role
I'd played in her dying. But I wasn't convinced
I'd played in her dying. But I wasn't convinced
enlightenmentstruck likelightning.
After we'd passed our quizzes, the Old Man, sitting,
grabbed his cane and motioned toward Alaska's fading
question on the blackboard.
"Let's look at one sentence on page ninety-four of this
very entertaining introduction to Zen that I had you read
this week. 'Everything that comes together falls apart,'"
the Old Man said. "Everything. Thechair I'msitting on. It was built, and so it will fall apart. I'm gonna fall apart,
probably before this chair. And you're gonna fall apart. The cells and organs and systems that make you you—
they came together, grew together, and so must fall
apart. The Buddha knew one thing science didn't prove
for millenniaafter his death:Entropy increases. Things fall
apart."
We are all going, I thought, and it applies to turtles and
turtlenecks, Alaska the girl and Alaska the place,
because nothing can last, not even the earth itself. The Buddha said that suffering was caused by desire, we'd
learned, and that the cessation of desire meant the
cessation of suffering. When you stopped wishing things wouldn't fallapart, you'd stop sufferingwhen they did.
Someday no one will remember that she everexisted,
I wrote in my notebook, and then, or that I did. Because memories fallapart, too.
And then you're left with nothing, left not even with a
ghost but with its shadow. In the beginning, she had
haunted me, haunted my dreams, but even now, just weeks later, she was slipping away, falling apart in my memory and everyoneelse's, dying again.
The Colonel, who had driven the Investigation from the
start, who had cared about what happened to her when I
start, who had cared about what happened to her when I
only cared if she loved me, had given up on it,
answerless. And I didn't like what answers I had: She
hadn'teven cared enough about what happened between
us to tell
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 79 of 88
Jake; instead, she had just talked cute with him, giving
himno reason to think that minutes before, I'd tasted her
boozy breath. And then something invisible snapped
inside her, and that which had come together
commenced to fallapart.
And maybe that was the only answer we'd ever have.
She fellapart because that's what happens. The Colonel
seemed resigned to that, but ifthe Investigation had once
been his idea, it was now the thing that held me together,
and I still hoped forenlightenment.
sixty-two daysafter
the next Sunday, I slept in until thelate-morning sunlight
slivered through the blinds and found its way to my face.
I pulled the comforter over my head, but the air got hot
and stale, so I got up to callmy parents.
"Miles!"mymomsaid before I even said hello. "We just
gotcaller identification."
"Does it magically know it's me calling from the pay
phone?"
She laughed. "No, it just says *pay phone' and the area
code. So I deduced. How are you?"she asked, a warm
concern in her voice.
"I'mdoing okay. I kinda screwed up some ofmy classes
fora while, but I'mback to studying now, so it should be
fine,"I said,and that was mostly true.
"I know it's been hard on you, buddy," she said. "Oh! Guess who your dad and I saw at a party last night? Mrs. Forrester. Your fourth-grade teacher! Remember?
Sheremembered you perfectly,and spoke very highly of
you, and we just talked"—and while I was pleased to
know that Mrs. Forrester held my fourth-grade self in
high regard, I only half listened as I read the scribbled
notes on the white-painted pine wall on either side of the
phone, looking for any new ones I might be able to
decode(Lacy's—Friday, 10 were the when and where
of a Weekday Warrior party, I figured)—"and we had
dinner with the Johnstons last night and I'm afraid that Dad had too much wine. We played charades and he was just awful." She laughed, and I felt so tired, but
someone had dragged the bench away from the pay
phone, so I sat my bony butt down on the hard concrete,
pulling the silvercord ofthe phone tautand preparing for
a serious soliloquy frommy mom, and then down below
all the other notes and scribbles, I saw a drawing of a
flower. Twelve oblong petals around a filled-in circle
against the daisy-white paint, and daisies, white daisies,
and I could hear her saying, What do you see, Pudge?
Look,and Icould see her sitting drunk on the phone with
Jake talking about nothing and What are you doing?
and she says, Nothing, just doodling, just doodling. And then, Oh God.
"Miles?"
"Yeah, sorry, Mom. Sorry. Chip's here. We gotta go
study. I gotta go."
"Will you call us later, then? I'msure Dad wants to talk
to you."
to you."
"Yeah, Mom; yeah, ofcourse. I love you, okay? Okay, I
gotta go."
"I think I found something!" I shouted at the Colonel,
invisible beneath his blanket, but the urgency inmy voice
and the promise ofsomething, anything, found, woke the Colonel up instantly, and he jumped fromhis bunk to the
linoleum. Before I could say anything, he grabbed
yesterday's jeans and sweatshirt from the floor, pulled
themon,and followed me outside.
"Look." I pointed, and he squatted down beside the
phone and said, "Yeah. She drew that. She was always
doodling thoseflowers."
"And 'just doodling,' remember? Jake asked her what
she was doing and she said 'just doodling,' and then she
said 'OhGod' and freaked out. Shelooked at the doodle
and remembered something."
"Good memory, Pudge," he acknowledged, and I wondered why the Colonel wouldn't just get excited
about it.
"And then she freaked out," I repeated, "and went and
got the tulips while we were getting the fireworks. She
saw the doodle, remembered whatever she'd forgotten,
and then freaked out."
"Maybe," he said, still staring at the flower, trying
perhaps to see it as she had. He stood up finally and
said, "It'sasolid theory, Pudge,"
and reached up and patted my shoulder, like a coach
complimenting a player. "But we still don't know what
sheforgot."
sixty-nine days after
AWEEKAFTER THEDISCOVERYofthe doodled
flower, I'd resigned myself to its insignificance—I wasn't Banzan in the meat market after all—and as the maples
around campus began to hint of resurrection and the maintenance crew began mowing the grass in the dorm
circleagain, itseemed to me we had finally lost her.
The Coloneland I walked into the woods down by the
lake that afternoon and smoked a cigarette in the precise
spot where the Eagle had caught us so many months
before. We'd just come froma town meeting, where the Eagle announced the school was going to build a
playground by the lake in memory of Alaska. She did
likeswings, I guess, buta playground? Larastood up at
the meeting—surely a first for her—and said they should
do something funnier, something Alaska herself would
have done.
Now, by the lake, sitting on a mossy, half-rotten log, the Colonel said to me, "Lara was right. We should do
something for her. A prank. Something she would have
loved."
"Like,a memorial prank?"
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 80 of 88
"Exactly. The Alaska Young Memorial Prank. We can make it an annualevent. Anyway, she came up with this
idea last year. But she wanted to save it to be our senior
prank. But it's good. It's really good. It's historic."
"Are you going to tellme?"I asked, thinking back to the
time when he and Alaska had left me out of prank
time when he and Alaska had left me out of prank
planning for BarnNight.
"Sure," he said. "The prank is entitled 'Subverting the
Patriarchal Paradigm.'" And he told me, and I have to
say, Alaska left us with the crown jewel of pranks, the Mona Lisa of high-school hilarity, the culmination of
generations ofCulver Creek pranking. And ifthe Colonel
could pull it off, it would be etched in the memory of
everyone at the Creek, and Alaska deserved nothing
less. Best of all, it did not, technically, involve any
expellable offenses.
The Colonel got up and dusted the dirt and moss off his
pants. "I think we owe her that."
And Iagreed, butstill, she owed usan explanation. Ifshe was up there, down there, out there, somewhere, maybe
she would laugh.
And maybe—just maybe—she would give us the clue we needed.
eighty-three days after
two weeks later, the Colonel returned from spring
break with two notebooks filled with the minutiae of
prank planning, sketches of various locations, and a
forty-page, two-column list of problems that might crop
up and their solutions. He calculated all times to a tenth
of a second, and all distances to the inch, and then he
recalculated, as if he could not bear the thought of failing
her again. And then on that Sunday, the Colonel woke
up late and rolled over. I was reading The Sound and
the Fury, which I was supposed to have read in midFebruary, and I looked up as I heard the rustling in the
bed, and the Colonel said, "Let's get the band back
together."And so I ventured out into the overcast spring
and woke up Lara and Takumi, then brought themback
and woke up Lara and Takumi, then brought themback
to Room 43. The Barn Night crew was intact—or as
close as it ever would be—for the Alaska Young MemorialPrank.
The three of us sat on the couchwhile the Colonelstood
in front of us, outlining the plan and our parts in it with an
excitement I hadn't seen in him since Before. When he
finished, heasked, "Any questions?"
"Yeah,"Takumisaid. "Is thatseriously going to work?"
"Well, first we gotta find a stripper. And second Pudge
has to work some magic with his dad."
"Allright, then,"Takumisaid. "Let's get to work."
eighty-four days after
every spring, Culver Creek took one Friday afternoon
off from classes, and all the students, faculty, and staff were required to go to the gym for Speaker Day.
Speaker Day featured two speakers—usually small-time
celebrities or small-time politicians or small-time
academics, the kind of people who would come and
speak ataschoolfor the measly three hundred bucks the
school budgeted. The junior class picked the first
speakerand theseniors thesecond,and anyone who had
ever attended a Speaker Day agreed that they were
torturously boring. We planned to shake Speaker Day
up a bit.
All we needed to do was convince the Eagle to let "Dr. WilliamMorse,"a"friend ofmy dad's"and a"preeminent
scholar of deviant sexuality in adolescents," be the junior
class's speaker.
So I called my dad at work, and his secretary, Paul,
asked meifeverythingwasallright, and I wondered why
asked meifeverythingwasallright, and I wondered why
everyone,everyone, asked me ifeverything was all right when Icalled atany time other than Sundaymorning.
"Yeah, I'mfine."
My dad picked up. "Hey, Miles. Iseverything allright?"
I laughed and spoke quietly into the phone, since people were milling about. "Yeah, Dad. Everything is fine. Hey,
remember when you stole the school belland buried it in
thecemetery?"
"Greatest Culver Creek prank ever," he responded
proudly.
"It was, Dad. It was. So listen, I wonder if you'd help out with the newgreatest Culver Creek prank ever."
"Oh, I don't know about that, Miles. I don't want you
getting in any trouble."
"Well, I won't. The whole junior class is planning it. And
it's not like anyone is going to get hurt or anything. Because, well, remember Speaker Day?"
"God that was boring. That was almost worse than
class."
"Yeah, well, I need you to pretend to be our speaker. Dr. William Morse, a professor of psychology at the University of Central Florida and an expert in adolescent
understandings ofsexuality."
He was quiet for a long time, and I looked down at Alaska's last daisy and waited for him to ask what the
prank was, and I would have told him, but I just heard
him breathe slowly into the phone, and then he said, "I won'teven ask. Hmm." Hesighed. "Swear to God you'll
never tell your mother."
never tell your mother."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 81 of 88
"I swear to God." I paused. It took me a second to
remember the Eagle's real name. "Mr. Starnes is going to
call you in about tenminutes."
"Okay, my name is Dr. William Morse, and I'm a
psychology professor,and—adolescentsexuality?"
"Yup. You'rethe best, Dad."
"I just want to seeif you can top me,"hesaid, laughing.
Although it killed the Colonel to do it, the prank could
not work without the assistance of the Weekday Warriors—specifically junior-class president Longwell
Chase, who by nowhad grown his silly surfer mop back. But the Warriors loved the idea, so I met Longwell in his
roomand said, "Let's go."
Longwell Chase and I had nothing to talk about and no
desire to pretend otherwise, so we walked silently to the Eagle's house. The Eagle came to the door before we
even knocked. He cocked his head a little when he saw
us, looking confused—and, indeed, we made an odd
couple, with Longwell's pressed and pleated khaki pants
and my I-keep-meaning-to-do-laundry bluejeans.
"The speaker we picked is a friend of Miles's dad," Longwellsaid. "Dr. WilliamMorse. He'sa professorata
university down in Florida, and he studies adolescent
sexuality."
"Aiming forcontroversy,are we?"
"Aiming forcontroversy,are we?"
"Oh no,"I said. "I've met Dr. Morse. He's interesting, but
he's not controversial. He just studies the, uh, the way
thatadolescents'
understanding of sex is still changing and growing. I mean, he's opposed to premaritalsex."
"Well. What's his phone number?" I gave the Eagle a
piece of paper, and he walked to a phone on the wall
and dialed. "Yes, hello. I'm calling to speak with Dr. Morse?...Okay, thanks...Hello, Dr. Morse. I have Miles Halter here in my home, and he tells me...great, wonderful...Well, I was wondering"—the Eagle paused,
twisting the cord around his finger—"wondering, I guess, whether you—just so long as you understand that these
are impressionable young people. We wouldn't want
explicit discussions.... Excellent. Excellent. I'mglad you
understand.... You, too, sir. See you soon!"The Eagle
hung up the phone, smiling, and said, "Good choice! He
seems likea very interestingman."
"Oh yeah," Longwell said very seriously. "I think he will
beextraordinarily interesting."
one hundred two daysafter
my father played Dr. WilliamMorse on the phone, but
the man playing himin reallife went by the name ofMaxx with two x's, except that his name was actually Stan,
except on Speaker Day his name was, obviously, Dr. William Morse. He was a veritable existential identity
crisis, a male stripper with more aliases than a covert CIAagent.
The first four "agencies" the Colonel called turned us
down. It wasn't until we got to the B's in the
"Entertainment" section of the Yellow Pages that we
found Bachelorette Parties R Us. The owner of the
aforementioned establishment liked the idea a great deal,
but, hesaid,
"Maxx is gonna love that. But no nudity. Not in front of
the kids."Weagreed—with somereluctance.
To ensure that none of us would get expelled, Takumi
and I collected five dollars from every junior at Culver Creek to cover"Dr.
William Morse's"appearance fee, since we doubted the Eagle would be keen on paying himafter witnessing the,
uh, speech. I paid the Colonel's five bucks. "I feel that I
have earned your charity," he said, gesturing to the spiral
notebooks he'd filled with plans.
As I sat throughmy classes that morning, Icould think of
nothing else. Every junior in the school had known for
two weeks, and so far not even the faintest rumor had
leaked out. But the Creek was rife with gossips—
particularly the Weekday Warriors, and if just one
person told one friend who told one friend who told one
friend who told the Eagle,everythingwould fallapart.
The Creek's don't-ratethos withstood the test nicely, but when Maxx/Stan/Dr. Morse didn't shown up by 11:50
that morning, I thought the Colonel would lose his shit. He sat on the bumper ofa car in the student parking lot,
his head bowed, his hands running through his thick mop
of dark hair over and over again, as if he were trying to
find something in there. Maxx had promised to arrive by
11:40, twentyminutes before the officialstart of Speaker Day, giving himtimeto learn thespeech and everything. I
stood next to the Colonel, worried but quiet, waiting.
We'd sent Takumi to call "the agency" and learn the whereabouts of"the performer."
"Ofall the things I thought could go wrong, this was not
one ofthem. We have no solution for this."
Takumi ran up, careful not to speak to us until he was
near. Kids werestarting to fileinto the gym. Latelatelate
late. We asked so little of our performer, really. We had written his speech. We had planned everything for him. AllMaxx had to do was showup with his outfit on.
And yet...
"The agency,"said Takumi, "says the performer is on his way."
"On his way?"the Colonelsaid, clawing at his hair with a
newvigor. "On his way? He's alreadylate."
"They said he should be—" and then suddenly our worries disappeared as a blue minivan rounded the
corner toward the parking lot, and I saw a man inside wearing asuit.
"That'd better be Maxx," the Colonel said as the car
parked. Hejogged up to thefront door.
"I'mMaxx,"the guy said upon opening the door.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 82 of 88
"Iama namelessand faceless representative ofthejunior
class," the Colonel answered, shaking Maxx's hand. He was thirtyish, tan and wide-shouldered, with astrong jaw
and a dark,close-cropped goatee.
We gave Maxx a copy of his speech, and he read
We gave Maxx a copy of his speech, and he read
through it quickly.
"Any questions?"Iasked.
"Uh, yeah. Given the nature of this event, I think y'all
should paymein advance."
He struck me as very articulate, even professorial, and I
felt a supreme confidence, as if Alaska had found the
best male stripper in centralAlabama and led us right to
him.
Takumi popped the trunk of his SUV and grabbed a
paper grocery bagwith $320 in it. "Here you go, Maxx,"
he said. "Okay, Pudge here is going to sit down there with you, because you are friends with Pudge's dad. That's in the speech. But, uh, we're hoping that if you get
interrogated when this is all over, you can find it in your
heart to say that the whole junior class called on a
conference call to hire you, because we wouldn't want
Pudge hereto get in any trouble."
Helaughed. "Sounds good to me. I took this gig because
I thought it was hilarious. Wish I'd thought of this in high
school."
As I walked into the gym, Maxx/Dr. William Morse at my side, Takumi and the Colonel trailing a good bit
behind me, I knew I was more likely to get busted than
anyone else. But I'd been reading the Culver Creek Handbook pretty closely the last couple weeks, and I
reminded myself of my two-pronged defense, in the
event I got in trouble: 1. There is not, technically, a rule
against paying astripper to dancein front oftheschool.
2. It cannot be proven that I was responsible for the
incident. It can only be proven that I brought a person
onto campus who I presumed to be an expert on sexual
deviancy in adolescence and who turned out to be an
deviancy in adolescence and who turned out to be an
actualsexual deviant.
I sat down with Dr. William Morse in the middle of the
front row of bleachers. Some ninth graders sat behind me, but when the Colonel walked up with Lara a moment later, he politely told them, "Thanks for holding
our seats," and ushered them away. As per the plan, Takumi was in the supply room on the second floor,
connecting his stereo equipment to the gym's
loudspeakers. I turned to Dr. Morseand said,
"We should look at each other with great interest and
talk like you'refriends withmy parents."
Hesmiled and nodded his head. "Heisa great man, your
father.And your mother—so beautiful."I rolled my eyes,
a bit disgusted.
Still, I liked this stripper fellow. The Eagle came in at
noon on the nose, greeted the senior-class speaker—a
former Alabama state attorney general—and then came
over to Dr. Morse, who stood with great aplomb and
half bowed as he shook the Eagle's hand—maybetoo
formal—
and the Eagle said, "We're certainly very glad to have
you here,"and Maxx replied, "Thank you. I hope I don't
disappoint."
I wasn't worried about getting expelled. I wasn't even worried about getting the Colonel expelled, although maybeI should have been. I was worried that it wouldn't work becauseAlaska hadn't planned it. Maybe no prank worthy of hercould be pulled offwithout her.
The Eaglestood behind the podium.
"This is a day of historic significance at Culver Creek. It
"This is a day of historic significance at Culver Creek. It was the vision of our founder Phillip Garden that you, as
students and we, as faculty, might take one afternoon a
year to benefit from the wisdom of voices outside the
school, and so we meet hereannually to learn fromthem,
to see the world as others see it. Today, our junior-class
speaker is Dr. WilliamMorse, a professor of psychology
at the University of Central Florida and a widely
respected scholar. He is here today to talk about
teenagers and sexuality, a topic I'm sure you'll find
considerably interesting. So please help me welcome Dr. Morseto the podium."
We applauded. My heart beat inmy chest like it wanted
to applaud, too. As Maxx walked up to the podium, Lara leaned down to me and whispered, "He ees really
hot."
"Thank you, Mr. Starnes." Maxx smiled and nodded to
the Eagle, then straightened his papers and placed them
on the podium. Even I almost believed he was a
professor of psychology. I wondered ifmaybe he wasan
actor supplementing his income.
He read directly fromthe speechwithout looking up, but
he read with the confident, airy tone ofa slightly snooty
academic. "I'm here today to talk with you about the
fascinating subject ofteenage sexuality. My research is in
the field of sexual linguistics, specifically the way that
young people discuss sex and related questions. So, for
instance, I'm interested in why my saying the word arm might not make you laugh, but my saying the word
vagina might." And, indeed, there were some nervous
twitters from the audience. "The way young people
speak about oneanother's bodies saysa great dealabout
our society. In today's world, boys are muchmore likely
to objectify girls' bodies than the other way around. Boys will say amongst themselves that so-and-so has a nice
will say amongst themselves that so-and-so has a nice
rack, while girls willmore likely say that a boy is cute, a
term that describes both physical and emotional
characteristics. This has the effect of turning girls into mere objects, while boys are seen by girls as whole
people—
"
And then Lara stood up, and in her delicate, innocent
accent, cut Dr. William Morse off. "You're so hot! I weesh you'd shut up and take off yourclothes."
The students laughed, but all of the teachers turned
around and looked at her, stunned silent. Shesat down.
"What's your name, dear?"
"Lara,"shesaid.
"Now, Lara," Maxx said, looking down at his paper to
remember the line, "what we have here is a very
interesting case study—a female objectifyingme, a male.
It's so unusual that I can only assume you're making an
attemptat humor."
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 83 of 88
Larastood up again and shouted, "I'mnot keeding! Take
off yourclothes."
He nervously looked down at the paper,and then looked
up at all of us, smiling. "Well, it is certainly important to
subvert the patriarchal paradigm, and I suppose this is a way. All right, then," he said, stepping to the left of the
podium. And then he shouted, loud enough that Takumi
could hear himupstairs, "This one's for Alaska Young."
could hear himupstairs, "This one's for Alaska Young."
As the fast, pumping bass of Prince's "Get Off" started
from the loudspeakers, Dr. William Morse grabbed the
leg of his pants with one hand and the lapel of his coat with the other, and the Velcro parted and his stage
costume came apart, revealing Maxx with two x's, a
stunningly muscular man with an eight-pack in his
stomach and bulging pec muscles, and Maxx stood
before us, smiling, wearing only briefs that were surely
tighty, but not whitey—black leather.
His feet in place, Maxx swayed his arms to the music,
and the crowd erupted with laughter and deafening,
sustained applause—the largest ovation by a good measure in Speaker Day history. The Eagle was up in a
flash, and as soon as he stood, Maxx stopped dancing,
but heflexed his pec muscles so that they jumped up and
down quickly in time to the music before the Eagle, not
smiling but sucking his lips in as if not smiling required
effort, indicated with a thumb that Maxx should go on
home,and Maxx did.
My eyes followed Maxx out the door, and I sawTakumi
standing in the doorway, fists raised in the air in triumph,
before he ran back upstairs to cut the music. I was glad
he'd gotten to seeat leasta bit oftheshow.
Takumi had plenty of time to get his equipment out,
because the laughing and talking went on for several minutes while the Eagle kept repeating, "Okay. Okay. Let's settle down now. Settle down, y'all. Let's settle
down."
The senior-class speaker spoke next. He blew. And as we left the gym, nonjuniors crowded around us, asking,
"Was it you?"and I just smiled and said no, for it had not
beenme, or the Colonel or Takumi or Lara or Longwell
Chase or anyone else in that gym. It had beenAlaska's
Chase or anyone else in that gym. It had beenAlaska's
prank through and through. The hardest part about
pranking, Alaska told me once, is not being able to
confess. But Icould confess on her behalf now.And as I
slowly made my way out of the gym, I told anyone who would listen, "No. It wasn't us. It was Alaska."
The four of us returned to Room 43, aglow in the
success of it, convinced that the Creek would never
again see such a prank, and it didn't even occur to me
that I might get in trouble until the Eagle opened the door
to our room and stood above us, and shook his head
disdainfully.
"I knowit was y'all,"said the Eagle.
We look at himsilently. He often bluffed. Maybe he was
bluffing.
"Don't ever do anything like that again," he said. "But, Lord, 'subverting the patriarchal paradigm'—it's like she wrotethespeech."Hesmiled and closed the door.
one hundred fourteen days after
A WEEK AND A HALF LATER, I walked back
frommy afternoon classes, the sun bearing down on my
skin in a constant reminder that spring in Alabama had
come and gone in a matter of hours, and now, early May, summer had returned for a six-month visit, and I
felt the sweat dribble down my back and longed for the
bitter winds ofJanuary. When I got to my room, I found Takumi sitting on the couch, reading my biography of Tolstoy.
"Uh, hi,"I said.
He closed the book and placed it beside him and said,
"January10."
"January10."
"What?"Iasked.
"January 10. That datering a bell?"
"Yeah, it's the day Alaska died." Technically, she died
three hours into January 11, but it was still, to usanyway, Monday night, January 10.
"Yeah, but something else, Pudge. January 9. Alaska's momtook her to thezoo."
"Wait. No. Howdo you knowthat?"
"Shetold usat BarnNight. Remember?"
Of course I didn't remember. If I could remember
numbers, I wouldn't be struggling toward a C-plus in
precalc.
"Holy shit,"I said as the Colonelwalked in.
"What?"the Colonelasked.
"January 9, 1997," I told him. "Alaska liked the bears. Her momliked the monkeys."The Colonel looked at me
blankly fora momentand then took his backpack offand
slung itacross theroomin asingle motion.
"Holy shit," he said. "WHY THE HELL DIDN'T I THINK OF THAT!"
Within a minute, the Colonel had the best solution either
of us would ever come up with. "Okay. She's sleeping.
Jake calls, and she talks to him, and she's doodling, and
she looks at her white flower, and 'Oh God my mom
liked white flowers and put themin my hair when I was
little,' and then she flips out. She comes back into her
roomand starts screaming at us that she forgot—forgot
roomand starts screaming at us that she forgot—forgot
about her mom, ofcourse—
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 84 of 88
so she takes the flowers, drives offcampus, on her way
to—what?" He looked at me. "What? Her mom's
grave?"
And I said, "Yeah, probably. Yeah. So she gets into the
car, and she just wants to get to her mom's grave, but
there's this jackknifed truck and thecops there, and she's
drunk and pissed off and she's in a hurry, so she thinks
she can squeeze past the cop car, and she's not even
thinking straight, but she has to get to her mom, and she
thinks shecan get past itsomehowand POOF."
Takumi nods slowly, thinking, and then says, "Or, she
gets into the car with the flowers. But she's already missed the anniversary. She's probably thinking that she
screwed things up with her momagain—first she doesn't
call 911, and now she can't even remember the freaking
anniversary. And she's furious and she hates herself, and
she decides, 'That's it, I'mdoing it,' and she sees the cop
carand there's herchanceand shejust floors it."
The Colonel reached into his pocket and pulled out a
pack of cigarettes, tapping it upside down against the COFFEE TABLE. "Well,"
hesaid. "Thatclears things up nicely."
one hundred eighteen daysafter
so WEGAVEUP. I'd finally had enough ofchasing after
a ghost who did not want to be discovered. We'd failed,
a ghost who did not want to be discovered. We'd failed, maybe, but some mysteries aren't meant to be solved. I
still did not know her as I wanted to, but I never could.
She made it impossible for me. And the accicide, the
suident, would never be anything else, and I was left to
ask, Did I help you toward a fate you didn't want, Alaska, or did I just assist in your willful selfdestruction? Because they are different crimes, and I
didn't know whether to feelangry at her for making me
part of her suicide or just to feel angry at myself for
letting her go.
But we knew what could be found out, and in finding it
out, she had made us closer—the Colonel and Takumi
and me, anyway. And that was it. She didn't leave me
enough to discover her, but she left me enough to
rediscover the Great Perhaps.
"There's one more thing we should do,"the Colonelsaid
as we played a video gametogether with thesound on—
just the two of us, like in the first days of the
Investigation.
"There's nothingmore wecan do."
"I want to drivethrough it,"hesaid. "Likeshe did."
Wecouldn't risk leaving campus in the middle ofthe night
like she had, so we left about twelve hours earlier, at
3:00 in the afternoon, with the Colonel behind the wheel
of Takumi's SUV. We asked Lara and Takumi to come
along, but theyweretired ofchasing ghosts, and besides,
finals werecoming.
It was a bright afternoon, and the sun bore down on the
asphaltso that theribbon ofroad before us quivered with
heat. We drove a mile down Highway 119 and then merged onto I-65 northbound, heading toward the
accidentsceneand Vine Station.
accidentsceneand Vine Station.
The Colonel drove fast, and we were quiet, staring
straight ahead. I tried to imagine what she might have
been thinking, trying again to seethrough timeand space,
to get inside her head just for a moment. An ambulance,
lights and sirens blaring, sped past us, going in the
opposite direction, toward school, and for an instant, I
felt a nervous excitement and thought, It could be
someone I know. I almost wished it was someone I
knew, to give new formand depth to the sadness I still
felt.
The silence broke: "Sometimes I liked it," I said.
"Sometimes I liked it thatshe was dead."
"Youmean it felt good?"
"No. I don't know. It felt..pure."
"Yeah," he said, dropping his usual eloquence. "Yeah. I
know. Me, too. It's natural. I mean, itmust be natural."
It always shocked me when I realized that I wasn't the
only person in the world who thought and felt such
strangeand awfulthings.
Five miles north of school, the Colonel moved into the
left lane oftheinterstateand began to accelerate. I gritted my teeth, and then before us, broken glass glittered in the
blare of the sun like the road was wearing jewelry, and
thatspotmust bethespot. He was stillaccelerating.
I thought:This would not be a bad wayto go.
I thought: Straight and fast Maybe she just decided at
thelast second.
And POOF we are through the moment of her death. We are driving through the place that she could not drive
We are driving through the place that she could not drive
through, passing onto asphalt she never saw, and we are
not dead. We are not dead! We are breathing and we
are crying and now slowing down and moving back into
theright lane.
We got off at the next exit, quietly, and, switching
drivers, we walked in front ofthecar. We metand I held
him, my hands balled into tight fists around his shoulders,
and he wrapped his short arms around me and squeezed
tight, so that I felt the heaves of his chest as we realized
over and
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 85 of 88
over again that we were stillalive. I realized it in waves
and we held on to each other crying and I thought, God we must look so lame, but it doesn't much matter when
you have just nowrealized, all the time later, that you are
stillalive.
one hundred nineteen days after
the colonel and I threw ourselves into school once we
gave up, knowing that we'd both need to ace our finals to
achieve our GPAgoals (I wanted a 3.0 and the Colonel wouldn't settle for even a 3.98). Our room became
Study Central for the four of us, with Takumi and Lara
over till all hours of the night talking about The Sound
and the Fury and meiosis and the Battle of the Bulge. The Colonel taught us a semester's worth of precalc,
although he was too good at math to teach it very well —"Of course it makes sense. Just trust me. Christ, it's
not that hard"—and I missed Alaska.
And when I could not catch up, I cheated. Takumiand I
shared copies ofCliffs Notes for Things Fall Apart and
shared copies ofCliffs Notes for Things Fall Apart and A Farewell to Arms ("These things are just too damned
long\" heexclaimed at one point).
We didn't talk much. But we didn't need to.
one hundred twenty-two days after
A COOL BREEZE had beaten back the onslaught of
summer, and on the morning the Old Man gave us our
final exams, he suggested we have class outside. I wondered why we could have an entire class outside when I'd been kicked out of class last semester for merely glancing outside, but the Old Man wanted to
haveclass outside, so we did. The Old Man sat in achair
that Kevin Richman carried out for him, and we sat on
the grass, my notebook at first perched awkwardly inmy
lap and then against thethick green grass, and the bumpy
ground did not lend itself to writing, and the gnats
hovered. We were too close to the lake for comfortable
sitting, really, but the Old Man seemed happy.
"I have here your finalexam. Last semester, I gave you
nearly two months to complete your final paper. This
time, you get two weeks."
He paused. "Well, nothing to be done about that, I
guess." He laughed. "To be honest, I just decided once
and forall to usethis paper topiclast night. It rather goes
against my nature. Anyway, pass these around." When
the pile came to me, I read the question:How will you—
you personally—ever get out of this labyrinth of
suffering? Now that you've wrestled with three major
religious traditions, apply your newly enlightened mind to Alaska's question.
After the exams had been passed out, the Old Man said,
"You need not specifically discuss the perspectives of
different religions in your essay, so no research is
different religions in your essay, so no research is
necessary. Your knowledge, or lack thereof, has been
established in the quizzes you've taken this semester. I
aminterested in howyou areableto fit the uncontestable
fact ofsuffering into your understanding ofthe world, and
howyou hopeto navigatethrough lifein spite ofit.
"Next year, assuming my lungs hold out, we'll study Taoism, Hinduism, and Judaism together—" The Old Man coughed and then started to laugh, which caused
himto cough again. "Lord, maybeI won't last. Butabout
the three traditions we've studied this year, I'd like to say
one thing. Islam, Christianity, and Buddhism each have
founder figures—Muhammad, Jesus, and the Buddha,
respectively. And in thinking about these founder figures,
I believe we must finally conclude that each brought a message of radical hope. To seventh-century Arabia, Muhammad brought the promise that anyone could find
fulfillment and everlasting life through allegiance to the
one true God. The Buddha held out hope that suffering
could betranscended. Jesus brought the messagethat the
last shall be first, that even the tax collectors and lepers —
the outcasts—had cause for hope. And so that is the
question I leave you with in this final: What is your cause
for hope?"
Back at Room43, the Colonelwas smoking in theroom. Even though I still had one evening left ofwashing dishes
in the cafeteria to work off my smoking conviction, we
didn't much fear the Eagle. We had fifteen days left, and
if we got caught, we'd just have to start senior year with
some work hours. "So how will we ever get out of this
labyrinth, Colonel?"Iasked.
"If only I knew,"hesaid.
"That's probably not gonna get you anA."
"Also it doesn't do much to putmy soulto rest."
"Or hers,"I said.
"Right. I'd forgotten about her."Heshook his head. "That
keeps happening."
"Well, you haveto writesomething," Iargued.
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 86 of 88
"After all this time, it still seems to me like straight and
fast is the only way out—but I choose the labyrinth. The
labyrinth blows, but Ichooseit."
one hundred thirty-six daysafter
two weeks later, I still hadn't finished my finalfor the Old Man, and the semester was just twenty-four hours from
ending. I was walking home frommy final test, a difficult
but ultimately (I hoped) successful battle with precalculus
that would winmethe B-minus I so richly desired. It was
genuinely hot out again, warm like she was. And I felt
okay. Tomorrow, my parents would come and load up my stuff, and we'd watch graduation and then go back to
Florida. The Colonel was going home to his mother to
spend the summer watching the soybeans grow, but I
could call himlong-distance, so we'd be in touch plenty. Takumi was going to Japan for the summer, and Lara was again to be driven home via green limo. I was just
thinking that it was all right not to know quite where Alaska was and quite where she was going that night, when I opened the door to my room and noticed a
folded slip of paper on the linoleumfloor. It was a single
folded slip of paper on the linoleumfloor. It was a single
piece of lime green stationery. At the top, it read in
calligraphy:
Fromthe Desk of..TakumiHikohito
Pudge/Colonel:
I amsorry that I have not talked to you before. I amnot
staying for graduation. I leave for Japan tomorrow morning. For a long time, I was mad at you. The way
you cut me out ofeverything hurt me, and so I kept what
I knew to myself. But then even after I wasn't mad
anymore, I still didn't say anything, and I don'teven really
know why. Pudge had that kiss, I guess. And I had this
secret.
You've mostly figured this out, but the truth is that I saw
her that night. I'd stayed up late with Lara and some
people, and then I was falling asleep and I heard her
crying outside my back window. It was like 3:15 that morning, maybe, and I walked out there and saw her walking through thesoccer field. I tried to talk to her, but
she was in a hurry. She told me that her mother was
dead eight years that day, and that she always put
flowers on her mother's grave on theanniversary, but she
forgot that year. She was out there looking for flowers,
but it was too early—too wintry. That's how I knew
about January 10. I still have no idea whether it was
suicide.
She was so sad, and I didn't know what to say or do. I
think she counted on me to be the one person who would always say and do the right things to help her, but
I couldn't. I just thought she was looking for flowers. I
didn't know she was going to go. She was drunk, just
trashed drunk,and I really didn't think she would drive or
anything. I thought she would justcry herselfto sleep and
then drive to visit her mom the next day or something.
then drive to visit her mom the next day or something.
She walked away, and then I heard a car start. I don't
knowwhat I was thinking.
So I let her go, too. And I'm sorry. I know you loved
her. It was hard not to.
Takumi
I ran out of the room, like I'd never smoked a cigarette,
like I ran with Takumi on Barn Night, across the dorm
circle to his room, but Takumi was gone. His bunk was
bare vinyl; his desk empty; an outline of dust where his
stereo had been. He was gone, and I did not have time
to tell him what I had just now realized: that I forgave
him, and that she forgave us, and that we had to forgive
to survivein thelabyrinth. There wereso many of us who would haveto live with things doneand things left undone
that day. Things that did not go right, things that seemed
okay at the time because we could not see the future. If
onlywecould seetheendless string ofconsequences that
result from our smallest actions. But we can't know
better until knowing better is useless.
And as I walked back to give Takumi's note to the Colonel, I saw that I would never know. I would never
know her wellenough to know her thoughts in those last minutes, would never know ifshe left us on purpose. But
the not-knowing would not keep me from caring, and I would always loveAlaskaYoung, my crooked neighbor, with allmy crooked heart.
I got back to Room43, but the Colonelwasn't home yet,
so I left the note on the top bunk and sat down at the
computer,and I wrote myway out ofthelabyrinth:
Before I got here, I thought for a long time that the way
out ofthelabyrinthwas to pretend that it did notexist, to
build a small, self-sufficient world in a back corner of the
build a small, self-sufficient world in a back corner of the
endless maze and to pretend that I was not lost, but
home. But that only led to a lonely life accompanied only
by the last words of the already-dead, so I came here
looking fora Great Perhaps, for realfriendsand a morethan-minor life. And then I screwed up and the Colonel
screwed up and Takumi screwed up and she slipped
through our fingers. And there's no sugarcoating it: She
deserved better friends.
When she fucked up, all those years ago, just a little girl
terrified into paralysis, she collapsed into the enigma of
herself. And I could have done that, but I saw where it
led for her. So I still believe in the Great Perhaps, and I
can believein it in spite of having lost her.
Because I will forget her, yes. That which came together will fallapart imperceptibly slowly, and I will forget, but
she will forgive my forgetting, just as I forgive her for
forgetting me and the Colonel and everyone but herself
and her mom in those last moments she spent as a
person. I know now that she forgives me for being dumb
and scared and doing the dumb and scared thing. I know
she forgives me, just as her mother forgives her. And
here's howI know:
I thought at first that she was just dead. Just darkness.
Justa body being eaten by bugs. I thoughtabout heralot
like that, as something's meal. What was her—green
eyes, half a smirk, the soft curves of her legs—would
soon be nothing, just the bones I never saw. I thought
about the slow process of becoming bone and then fossil
and then coal that will, in millions of years, be mined by
humans of the future,
http://dc142.4shared.com/download/98855612/9daf06c9/Looking_for_Alaska_by_John_G...
4/23/2009
Page 87 of 88
Page 87 of 88
and how they would heat their homes with her, and then
she would be smoke billowing out of a smokestack,
coating theatmosphere. I still think that, sometimes, think
that maybe"theafterlife"is just somethingwe made up to
ease the pain of loss, to make our time in the labyrinth
bearable. Maybe she was just matter, and matter gets
recycled.
But ultimately I do not believe that she was only matter. The rest of her must be recycled, too. I believe now that we are greater than the sum of our parts. If you take Alaska's genetic code and you add her life experiences
and the relationships she had with people, and then you
take the size and shape of her body, you do not get her. There is something else entirely. There is a part of her
greater than the sum of her knowable parts. And that
part has to go somewhere, because it cannot be
destroyed.
Although no one willever accuse me of being much ofa
science student, one thing I learned fromscience classes
is that energy is never created and never destroyed. And
ifAlaskatook her own life, that is the hopeI wish Icould
have given her. Forgetting her mother, failing her mother
and her friends and herself—those are awful things, but
she did not need to fold into herself and self-destruct. Those awful things are survivable, because we are as
indestructibleas we believe ourselves to be. When adults
say, "Teenagers think they are invincible" with that sly,
stupid smile on their faces, they don't know how right
they are. We need never be hopeless, because we can
never be irreparably broken. We think that we are
invincible because we are. We cannot be born, and we
cannot die. Like all energy, we can only change shapes
and sizes and manifestations. They forget that when they
get old. They get scared of losing and failing. But that
part of us greater than the sumof our parts cannot begin
part of us greater than the sumof our parts cannot begin
and cannotend,and so itcannot fail.
So I knowshe forgives me, justas I forgive her. Thomas Edison's last words were:"It's very beautiful over there."
I don't knowwherethereis, but I believeit's somewhere,
and I hopeit's beautiful.
somelast words on last words
like pudge halter, I amfascinated by last words. For me,
it began when I was twelve years old. Reading a history
textbook, I came across the dying words of President
John Adams: "Thomas Jefferson still survives."
(Incidentally, he didn't. Jefferson had died earlier that
same day, July 4, 1826; Jefferson's last words were
"This is the Fourth?")
I can't say for sure why I remain interested in last words
or why I've never stopped looking for them. It is truethat
I really loved John Adams's last words when I was
twelve. But I also really loved this girl named Whitney. Most loves don't last. (Whitney sure didn't. I can't even
remember her last name.) Butsome do.
Another thing that Ican't say for sureis thatall ofthelast words quoted in this book are definitive. Almost by
definition, last words are difficult to verify. Witnesses are
emotional, time gets conflated, and the speaker isn't
around to clear up any controversy. I have tried to be
accurate, but it is not surprising that there is debate over
thetwo central quotes in Looking for Alaska.