


White Teeth


Zadie Smith


Archie
1974, 1945


‘Every little trifle, for some reason, does seem incalculably important today, and when you say of 
a thing that “nothing hangs on it” it sounds like blasphemy. There’s never any knowing — how am I 
to put it? — which  of  our  actions,  which  of  our  idlenesses  won’t  have  things hanging on 
it for ever.’
Where Angels Fear to Tread, E. M. Forster




1 The Peculiar Second Marriage of Archie Jones


Early  in  the  morning,  late  in  the  century,  Cricklewood  Broadway.  At
06.27 hours on 1 January 1975, Alfred Archibald Jones was dressed in corduroy and sat in a 
fume-filled Cavalier Musketeer Estate face down on the steering wheel, hoping the judgement would 
not be too heavy upon him. He lay forward in a prostrate cross, jaw slack, arms splayed either side 
like some fallen angel; scrunched up in each fist he held his army service medals (left) and his 
marriage licence (right), for he had decided to take his mistakes with him. A little green light 
flashed in his eye,  signalling  a  right  turn  he  had  resolved  never  to  make.  He  was 
resigned to it. He was prepared for it. He had flipped a coin and stood staunchly by its 
conclusions. This was a decided-upon suicide. In fact it was a New Year’s resolution.
But even as his breathing became spasmodic and his lights dimmed, Archie was aware that Cricklewood 
Broadway would seem a strange choice. Strange to the first person to notice his slumped figure 
through the windscreen, strange to the policemen who would file the report, to the local journalist 
called upon to write fifty words, to the next of kin who  would  read  them.  Squeezed  between  an 
 almighty  concrete cinema  complex  at  one  end  and  a  giant  intersection  at  the  other, 
Cricklewood was no kind of place. It was not a place a man came to die. It was a place a man came 
in order to go other places via the A41. But   Archie   Jones   didn’t   want   to   die   in   
some   pleasant,   distant woodland,  or  on  a  cliff  edge  fringed  with  delicate  heather.  
The  way Archie saw it, country people should die in the country and city people should die in the 
city. Only proper. In death as he was in life and all that. It made sense that Archibald should die 
on this nasty urban street where  he  had  ended  up,  living  alone  at  the  age  of  
forty-seven,  in  a

one-bedroom flat above a deserted chip shop. He wasn’t the type to make elaborate plans — suicide 
notes and funeral instructions — he wasn’t the type for anything fancy. All he asked for was a bit 
of silence, a bit of shush  so  he  could  concentrate.  He  wanted  it  to  be  perfectly quiet  
and  still,  like  the  inside  of  an  empty  confessional  box  or  the moment in the brain 
between thought and speech. He wanted to do it before the shops opened.
Overhead, a gang of the local flying vermin took off from some unseen perch, swooped, and seemed to 
be zeroing in on Archie’s car roof — only to perform, at the last moment, an impressive U-turn, 
moving as one  with  the  elegance  of  a  curve  ball  and  landing  on  the  Hussein- Ishmael, a 
celebrated halal butchers. Archie was too far gone to make a big noise about it, but he watched 
them with a warm internal smile as they  deposited  their  load,  streaking  white  walls  purple.  
He  watched them stretch their peering bird heads over the Hussein-Ishmael gutter; he watched them 
watch the slow and steady draining of blood from the dead things — chickens, cows, sheep — hanging 
on their hooks like coats around the shop. The Unlucky. These pigeons had an instinct for the  
Unlucky,  and  so  they  passed  Archie  by.  For,  though  he  did  not know it, and despite the 
Hoover tube that lay on the passenger seat pumping from the exhaust pipe into his lungs, luck was 
with him that morning.  The  thinnest  covering  of  luck  was  on  him  like  fresh  dew. Whilst  
he  slipped  in  and  out  of  consciousness,  the  position  of  the planets,   the   music   of   
the   spheres,   the   flap   of   a   tiger-moth’s diaphanous wings in Central Africa, and a whole 
bunch of other stuff that  Makes  Shit  Happen  had  decided  it  was  second-chance  time  for 
Archie. Somewhere, somehow, by somebody, it had been decided that he would live.



The Hussein-Ishmael was owned by Mo Hussein-Ishmael, a great bull of  a  man  with  hair  that  
rose  and  fell  in  a  quiff,  then  a  ducktail.  Mo believed that with pigeons you have to get 
to the root of the problem: not the excretions but the pigeon itself. The shit is not the shit 
(this was Mo’s mantra), the pigeon is the shit. So the morning of Archie’s almost- death began as 
every morning in the Hussein-Ishmael, with Mo resting

his  huge  belly  on  the  windowsill,  leaning  out  and  swinging  a  meat cleaver in an attempt 
to halt the flow of dribbling purple.
‘Get out of it! Get away, you shit-making bastards! Yes! SIX!’
It  was  cricket,  basically  —  the  Englishman’s  game  adapted  by  the immigrant, and six was 
the most pigeons you could get at one swipe.
‘Varin!’ said Mo, calling down to the street, holding the bloodied cleaver up in triumph. ‘You’re 
in to bat, my boy. Ready?’
Below  him  on  the  pavement  stood  Varin  —  a  massively  overweight Hindu  boy  on  misjudged  
work  experience  from  the  school  round  the corner, looking up like a big dejected blob 
underneath Mo’s question mark. It was Varin’s job to struggle up a ladder and gather spliced bits 
of  pigeon  into  a  small  Kwik  Save  carrier  bag,  tie  the  bag  up,  and dispose of it in the 
bins at the other end of the street.
‘Come on, Mr Fatty-man,’ yelled one of Mo’s kitchen staff, poking Varin up the arse with a broom as 
punctuation for each word. ‘Get-your-fat- 
Ganesh-Hindu-backside-up-there-Elephant-Boy-and-bring-some-of- that-mashed-pigeon-stuff-with-you.’
Mo  wiped  the  sweat  off  his  forehead,  snorted,  and  looked  out  over Cricklewood, surveying 
the discarded armchairs and strips of carpet, outdoor  lounges  for  local  drunks;  the  
slot-machine  emporiums,  the greasy spoons and the minicabs — all covered in shit. One day, so Mo 
believed, Cricklewood and its residents would have cause to thank him for  his  daily  massacre;  
one  day  no  man,  woman  or  child  in  the broadway  would  ever  again  have  to  mix  one  
part  detergent  to  four parts vinegar to clean up the crap that falls on the world. The shit is 
not the shit, he repeated solemnly, the pigeon is the shit. Mo was the only man in the community 
who truly understood. He was feeling really very Zen about this — very goodwill-to-all-men — until 
he spotted Archie’s car.
‘Arshad!’
A shifty-looking  skinny  guy  with  a  handlebar  moustache,  dressed  in four different shades of 
brown, came out of the shop, with blood on his palms.

‘Arshad!’  Mo  barely  restrained  himself,  stabbed  his  finger  in  the direction of the car. 
‘My boy, I’m going to ask you just once.’
‘Yes, Abba?’ said Arshad, shifting from foot to foot.
‘What the hell is this? What is this doing here? I got delivery at 6.30. I got fifteen dead bovines 
turning up here at 6.30. I got to get it in the back.  That’s  my  job.  You  see?  There’s  meat  
coming.  So,  I  am perplexed  .  .  .’ Mo  affected  a  look  of  innocent  confusion.  ‘Because  
I thought  this  was  clearly  marked  “Delivery  Area”.’  He  pointed  to  an ageing wooden crate 
which bore the legend NO PARKINGS OF ANY VEHICLE ON ANY DAYS. ‘Well?’
‘I don’t know, Abba.’
‘You’re my son, Arshad. I don’t employ you not to know. I employ him not to know’ — he reached out 
of the window and slapped Varin, who was negotiating the perilous gutter like a tightrope-walker, 
giving him a thorough cosh to the back of his head and almost knocking the boy off his perch — ‘I 
employ you to know things. To compute information. To bring  into  the  light  the  great  darkness 
 of  the  creator’s  unexplainable universe.’
‘Abba?’
‘Find out what it’s doing there and get rid of it.’
Mo disappeared from the window. A minute later Arshad returned with the explanation. ‘Abba.’
Mo’s  head  sprang  back  through  the  window  like  a  malicious  cuckoo from a Swiss clock.
‘He’s gassing himself, Abba.’ ‘What?’
Arshad shrugged. ‘I shouted through the car window and told the guy to move on and he says, “I am 
gassing myself, leave me alone.” Like that.’
‘No one gasses himself on my property,’ Mo snapped as he marched downstairs. ‘We are not licensed.’
Once  in  the  street,  Mo  advanced  upon  Archie’s  car,  pulled  out  the

towels that were sealing the gap in the driver’s window, and pushed it down five inches with brute, 
bullish force.
‘Do you hear that, mister? We’re not licensed for suicides around here. This  place  halal.  
Kosher,  understand?  If  you’re  going  to  die  round here, my friend, I’m afraid you’ve got to 
be thoroughly bled first.’


Archie  dragged  his  head  off  the  steering  wheel.  And  in  the  moment between  focusing  on  
the  sweaty  bulk  of  a  brown-skinned  Elvis  and realizing that life was still his, he had a 
kind of epiphany. It occurred to him that, for the first time since his birth, Life had said Yes to 
Archie Jones. Not simply an ‘OK’ or ‘You-might-as-well-carry-on-since-you’ve- started’,  but  a  
resounding  affirmative.  Life  wanted  Archie.  She  had jealously  grabbed  him  from  the  jaws  
of  death,  back  to  her  bosom. Although he was not one of her better specimens, Life wanted 
Archie and Archie, much to his own surprise, wanted Life.
Frantically, he wound down both his windows and gasped for oxygen from  the  very  depths  of  his  
lungs.  In  between  gulps  he  thanked  Mo profusely, tears streaming down his cheeks, his hands 
clinging on to Mo’s apron.
‘All  right,  all  right,’  said  the  butcher,  freeing  himself  from  Archie’s fingers  and  
brushing  himself  clean,  ‘move  along  now.  I’ve  got  meat coming.  I’m  in  the  business  of  
bleeding.  Not  counselling.  You  want Lonely Street. This Cricklewood Lane.’
Archie, still choking on thankyous, reversed, pulled out from the curb, and turned right.


Archie  Jones  attempted  suicide  because  his  wife  Ophelia,  a  violet- eyed Italian with a 
faint moustache, had recently divorced him. But he had not spent New Year’s morning gagging on the 
tube of a vacuum cleaner because he loved her. It was rather because he had lived with her for so 
long and had not loved her. Archie’s marriage felt like buying a pair of shoes, taking them home 
and finding they don’t fit. For the

sake of appearances, he put up with them. And then, all of a sudden and after thirty years, the 
shoes picked themselves up and walked out of the house. She left. Thirty years.


As  far  as  he  remembered,  just  like  everybody  else  they  began  well. The first spring of 
1946, he had stumbled out of the darkness of war and into a Florentine coffee house, where he was 
served by a waitress truly  like  the  sun:  Ophelia  Diagilo,  dressed  all  in  yellow,  
spreading warmth   and   the   promise   of   sex   as   she   passed   him   a   frothy 
cappuccino. They walked into it blinkered as horses. She was not to know  that  women  never  
stayed  as  daylight  in  Archie’s  life;  that somewhere in him he didn’t like them, he didn’t 
trust them, and he was able  to  love  them  only  if  they  wore  haloes.  No  one  told  Archie  
that lurking in the Diagilo family tree were two hysteric aunts, an uncle who talked to aubergines 
and a cousin who wore his clothes back to front. So they got married and returned to England, where 
she realized very quickly her mistake, he drove her very quickly mad, and the halo was packed off 
to the attic to collect dust with the rest of the bric-a-brac and broken  kitchen  appliances  that 
 Archie  promised  one  day  to  repair. Amongst that bric-a-brac was a Hoover.



On Boxing Day morning, six days before he parked outside Mo’s halal butchers,  Archie  had  
returned  to  their  semi-detached  in  Hendon  in search  of  that  Hoover.  It  was  his  fourth  
trip  to  the  attic  in  so  many days, ferrying out the odds and ends of a marriage to his new 
flat, and the Hoover was amongst the very last items he reclaimed — one of the most broken things, 
most ugly things, the things you demand out of sheer  bloody-mindedness  because  you  have  lost  
the  house.  This  is what divorce is: taking things you no longer want from people you no longer 
love.
‘So you again,’ said the Spanish home-help at the door, SantaMaria or Maria-Santa  or  something.  
‘Meester  Jones,  what  now?  Kitchen  sink, sí?’

‘Hoover,’ said Archie, grimly. ‘Vacuum.’
She  cut  her  eyes  at  him  and  spat  on  the  doormat  inches  from  his shoes. ‘Welcome, 
señor.’
The place had become a haven for people who hated him. Apart from the  home-help,  he  had  to  
contend  with  Ophelia’s  extended  Italian family,  her  mental-health  nurse,  the  woman  from  
the  council,  and  of course  Ophelia  herself,  who  was  to  be  found  in  the  kernel  of  
this nuthouse, curled up in a foetal ball on the sofa, making lowing sounds into a bottle of 
Bailey’s. It took him an hour and a quarter just to get through enemy lines — and for what? A 
perverse Hoover, discarded months earlier because it was determined to perform the opposite of 
every vacuum’s objective: spewing out dust instead of sucking it in.
‘Meester  Jones,  why  do  you  come  here  when  it  make  you  so unhappy? Be reasonable. What 
can you want with it?’ The home-help was following him up the attic stairs, armed with some kind of 
cleaning fluid: ‘It’s broken. You don’t need this. See? See?’ She plugged it into a socket  and  
demonstrated  the  dead  switch.  Archie  took  the  plug  out and silently wound the cord round 
the Hoover. If it was broken, it was coming  with  him.  All  broken  things  were  coming  with  
him.  He  was going to fix every damn broken thing in this house, if only to show that he was good 
for something.
‘You  good  for  nothing!’  Santa  whoever  chased  him  back  down  the stairs. ‘Your wife is ill 
in her head, and this is all you can do!’
Archie  hugged  the  Hoover  to  his  chest  and  took  it  into  the  crowded living room, where, 
under several pairs of reproachful eyes, he got out his toolbox and started work on it.
‘Look   at   him,’   said   one   of   the   Italian   grandmothers,   the   more glamorous  one  
with  the  big  scarves  and  fewer  moles,  ‘he  take everything,  capisce?  He  take-a  her  
mind,  he  take-a  the  blender,  he take-a the old stereo — he take-a everything except the 
floorboards. It make-a you sick . . .’
The woman from the council, who even on dry days resembled a long- haired  cat  soaked  to  the  
skin,  shook  her  skinny  head  in  agreement. ‘It’s  disgusting,  you  don’t  have  to  tell  me, 
 it’s  disgusting  .  .  .  and

naturally,  we’re  the  ones  left  to  sort  out  the  mess;  it’s  muggins  here who has to—’
Which was overlapped by the nurse: ‘She can’t stay here alone, can she . . . now he’s buggered off, 
poor woman . . . she needs a proper home, she needs . . .’
I’m  here,  Archie  felt  like  saying,  I’m  right  here  you  know,  I’m  bloody right here. And 
it was my blender.
But he wasn’t one for confrontation, Archie. He listened to them all for another  fifteen  minutes, 
 mute  as  he  tested  the  Hoover’s  suction against pieces of newspaper, until he was overcome by 
the sensation that  Life  was  an  enormous  rucksack  so  impossibly  heavy  that,  even though  
it  meant  losing  everything,  it  was  infinitely  easier  to  leave  all baggage  here  on  the  
roadside  and  walk  on  into  the  blackness.  You don’t  need  the  blender,  Archie-boy,  you  
don’t  need  the  Hoover.  This stuff’s all dead weight. Just lay down the rucksack, Arch, and join 
the happy campers in the sky. Was that wrong? To Archie — ex-wife and ex-wife’s relatives in one 
ear, spluttering vacuum in the other — it just seemed that The End was unavoidably nigh. Nothing 
personal to God or whatever. It just felt like the end of the world. And he was going to need  more 
 than  poor  whisky,  novelty  crackers  and  a  paltry  box  of Quality Street — all the 
strawberry ones already scoffed — to justify entering another annum.
Patiently  he  fixed  the  Hoover,  and  vacuumed  the  living  room  with  a strange  methodical  
finality,  shoving  the  nozzle  into  the  most  difficult corners. Solemnly he flipped a coin 
(heads, life, tails, death) and felt nothing in particular when he found himself staring at the 
dancing lion. Quietly he detached the Hoover tube, put it in a suitcase, and left the house for the 
last time.


But dying’s no easy trick. And suicide can’t be put on a list of Things to Do in between cleaning 
the grill pan and levelling the sofa leg with a brick. It is the decision not to do, to un-do; a 
kiss blown at oblivion. No matter  what  anyone  says,  suicide  takes  guts.  It’s  for  heroes  
and martyrs, truly vainglorious men. Archie was none of these. He was a

man  whose  significance  in  the  Greater  Scheme  of  Things  could  be figured along familiar 
ratios:
Pebble: Beach. Raindrop: Ocean. Needle: Haystack.
So for a few days he ignored the decision of the coin and just drove around  with  the  Hoover  
tube.  At  nights  he  looked  out  through  the windscreen into the monstropolous sky and had the 
old realization of his universal proportions, feeling what it was to be tiny and rootless. He  
thought  about  the  dent  he  might  make  on  the  world  if  he disappeared,  and  it  seemed  
negligible,  too  small  to  calculate.  He squandered spare minutes wondering whether ‘Hoover’ had 
become a generic term for vacuum cleaners or whether it was, as others have argued, just a brand 
name. And all the time the Hoover tube lay like a great flaccid cock on his back seat, mocking his 
quiet fear, laughing at his  pigeon-steps  as  he  approached  the  executioner,  sneering  at  his 
impotent indecision.
Then, on the 29th of December, he went to see his old friend Samad Miah Iqbal. An unlikely compadre 
possibly, but still the oldest friend he had  —  a  Bengali  Muslim  he  had  fought  alongside  
back  when  the fighting had to be done, who reminded him of that war; that war that reminded  some 
 people  of  fatty  bacon  and  painted-on-stockings  but recalled in Archie gunshots and card 
games and the taste of a sharp, foreign alcohol.
‘Archie, my dear friend,’ Samad had said, in his warm, hearty tones. ‘You must forget all this 
wife-trouble. Try a new life. That is what you need. Now, enough of all this: I will match your 
five bob and raise you five.’
They were sitting in their new haunt, O’Connell’s Pool House, playing poker with only three hands, 
two of Archie’s and one of Samad’s — Samad’s right hand being a broken thing, grey-skinned and 
unmoving, dead in every way bar the blood that ran through it. The place they sat in,  where  they  
met  each  evening  for  dinner,  was  half  café,  half gambling den, owned by an Iraqi family, 
the many members of which

shared a bad skin condition.
‘Look at me. Marrying Alsana has given me this new lease on living, you understand? She opens up 
for me the new possibilities. She’s so young, so vital — like a breath of fresh air. You come to me 
for advice? Here it is. Don’t live this old life — it’s a sick life, Archibald. It does you no 
good. No good whatsoever.’
Samad  had  looked  at  him  with  a  great  sympathy,  for  he  felt  very tenderly  for  Archie.  
Their  wartime  friendship  had  been  severed  by thirty years of separation across continents, 
but in the spring of 1973 Samad had come to England, a middle-aged man seeking a new life with his 
twenty-year-old new bride, the diminutive, moon-faced Alsana Begum with her shrewd eyes. In a fit 
of nostalgia, and because he was the  only  man  Samad  knew  on  this  little  island,  Samad  had 
 sought Archie  out,  moved  into  the  same  London  borough.  And  slowly  but surely a kind of 
friendship was being rekindled between the two men.
‘You play like a faggot,’ said Samad, laying down the winning queens back to back. He flicked them 
with the thumb of his left hand in one elegant move, making them fall to the table in a fan shape.
‘I’m old,’ said Archie, throwing his cards in, ‘I’m old. Who’d have me now? It was hard enough 
convincing anybody the first time.’
‘That is nonsense, Archibald. You have not even met the right one yet. This Ophelia, Archie, she is 
not the right one. From what you leave me to understand she is not even for this time—’
He referred to Ophelia’s madness, which led her to believe, half of the time, that she was the maid 
of the celebrated fifteenth-century art lover Cosimo de’ Medici.
‘She is born, she lives, simply in the wrong time! This is just not her day!  Maybe  not  her  
millennium.  Modern  life  has  caught  that  woman completely  unawares  and  up  the  arse.  Her  
mind  is  gone.  Buggered. And you? You have picked up the wrong life in the cloakroom and you must 
return it. Besides, she has not blessed you with children . . . and life  without  children,  
Archie,  what  is  it  for?  But  there  are  second chances; oh yes, there are second chances in 
life. Believe me, I know. You,’ he continued, raking in the 10p’s with the side of his bad hand,

‘should never have married her.’
Bloody hindsight, thought Archie. It’s always 20/20.
Finally, two days after this discussion, early on New Year’s morning, the pain had reached such a 
piercing level that Archie was no longer able to cling to Samad’s advice. He had decided instead to 
mortify his own flesh, to take his own life, to free himself from a life path that had taken  him  
down  numerous  wrong  turnings,  led  him  deep  into  the wilderness and finally petered out 
completely, its breadcrumb course gobbled up by the birds.


Once the car started to fill with gas, he had experienced the obligatory flashback  of  his  life  
to  date.  It  turned  out  to  be  a  short,  unedifying viewing  experience,  low  on  
entertainment  value,  the  metaphysical equivalent of the Queen’s Speech. A dull childhood, a bad 
marriage, a dead-end job — that classic triumvirate — they all flicked by quickly, silently, with 
little dialogue, feeling pretty much the same as they did the first time round. He was no great 
believer in destiny, Archie, but on reflection  it  did  seem  that  a  special  effort  of  
predestination  had ensured his life had been picked out for him like a company Christmas present — 
early, and the same as everyone else’s.
There was the war, of course; he had been in the war, only for the last year  of  it,  aged  just  
seventeen,  but  it  hardly  counted.  Not  frontline, nothing like that. He and Samad, old Sam, 
Sammy-boy, they had a few tales  to  tell,  mind,  Archie  even  had  a  bit  of  shrapnel  in  the 
 leg  for anyone who cared to see it — but nobody did. No one wanted to talk about that  any  more. 
 It  was  like  a  club-foot,  or  a  disfiguring  mole.  It was  like  nose  hair.  People  looked 
 away.  If  someone  said  to  Archie, What have you done in life, then, or What’s your biggest 
memory, well, God  help  him  if  he  mentioned  the  war;  eyes  glazed  over,  fingers tapped, 
everybody offered to buy the next round. No one really wanted to know.
Summer  of  1955  Archie  went  to  Fleet  Street  with  his  best  winkle- pickers on, looking for 
work as a war correspondent. Poncey-looking bloke   with   a   thin   moustache   and   a   thin   
voice   had   said,   Any

experience, Mr Jones? And Archie had explained. All about Samad. All about  their  Churchill  tank. 
 Then  this  poncey  one  had  leant  over  the desk, all smug, all suited, and said, We would 
require something other than  merely  having  fought  in  a  war,  Mr  Jones.  War  experience  
isn’t really relevant.
And that was it, wasn’t it. There was no relevance in the war — not in ’55, even less now in ’74. 
Nothing he did then mattered now. The skills you learnt were, in the modern parlance, not relevant, 
not transferable.
Was there anything else, Mr Jones?
But of course there bloody wasn’t anything else, the British education system  having  tripped  him 
 up  with  a  snigger  many  years  previously. Still, he had a good eye for the look of a thing, 
for the shape of a thing, and  that’s  how  he  had  ended  up  in  the  job  at  MorganHero,  
twenty years and counting in a printing firm in the Euston Road, designing the way  all  kinds  of  
things  should  be  folded  —  envelopes,  direct  mail, brochures, leaflets — not much of an 
achievement, maybe, but you’ll find  things  need  folds,  they  need  to  overlap,  otherwise  
life  would  be like a broadsheet: flapping in the wind and down the street so you lose the   
important   sections.   Not   that   Archie   had   much   time   for   the broadsheets.  If  they  
couldn’t  be  bothered  to  fold  them  properly,  why should he bother to read them (that’s what 
he wanted to know)?


What else? Well, Archie hadn’t always folded paper. Once upon a time he had been a track cyclist. 
What Archie liked about track cycling was the  way  you  went  round  and  round.  Round  and  
round.  Giving  you chance after chance to get a bit better at it, to make a faster lap, to do it 
right. Except the thing about Archie was he never did get any better.
62.8 seconds. Which is a pretty good time, world-class standard, even. But for three years he got 
precisely 62.8 seconds on every single lap. The other cyclists used to take breaks to watch him do 
it. Lean their bikes against the incline and time him with the second hand of their wrist  watches. 
 62.8  every  time.  That  kind  of  inability  to  improve  is really very rare. That kind of 
consistency is miraculous, in a way.
Archie  liked  track  cycling,  he  was  consistently  good  at  it  and  it

provided him with the only truly great memory he had. In 1948, Archie Jones had participated in the 
Olympics in London, sharing thirteenth place  (62.8  seconds)  with  a  Swedish  gynaecologist  
called  Horst Ibelgaufts. Unfortunately this fact had been omitted from the Olympic records by a 
sloppy secretary who returned one morning after a coffee break with something else on her mind and 
missed his name as she transcribed one list to another piece of paper. Madam Posterity stuck Archie 
down the arm of the sofa and forgot about him. His only proof that the event had taken place at all 
were the periodic letters and notes he had received over the years from Ibelgaufts himself. Notes 
like:


17 May 1957

Dear Archibald,

I enclose a picture of my good wife and I in our garden in front of a rather unpleasant 
construction site. Though it may not look like Arcadia, it is here that I am building a crude 
velodrome — nothing like the one you and I raced in, but sufficient for my needs. It will be on a 
far smaller scale, but you see, it is for the children we are yet to have. I see them pedalling 
around it in my dreams and wake up with a glorious smile upon my face! Once it is completed, we 
insist that you visit us. Who more worthy to christen the track of your earnest competitor,

Horst Ibelgaufts


And the postcard that lay on the dashboard this very day, the day of his Almost Death:


28 December 1974 Dear Archibald,
I am taking up the harp. A New Year’s resolution, if you like.

Late in the day, I realize, but you’re never too old to teach the old dog in you new tricks, don’t 
you feel? I tell you, it’s a heavy instrument to lay against your shoulder, but the sound of it is 
quite angelic and my wife thinks me quite sensitive because of it. Which is more than she could say 
for my old cycling obsession! But then, cycling was only ever understood by old boys like you, 
Archie, and of course the author of this little note, your old contender,

Horst Ibelgaufts


He  had  not  met  Horst  since  the  race,  but  he  remembered  him affectionately as an enormous 
man with strawberry-blond hair, orange freckles  and  misaligned  nostrils,  who  dressed  like  an 
 international playboy and seemed too large for his bike. After the race Horst had got Archie 
horribly drunk and procured two Soho whores who seemed to know  Horst  well  (‘I  make  many  
business  trips  to  your  fair  capital, Archibald,’  Horst  had  explained).  The  last  Archie  
had  ever  seen  of Horst was an unwanted glimpse of his humongous pink arse bobbing up  and  down  
in  the  adjoining  room  of  an  Olympic  chalet.  The  next morning,  waiting  at  the  front  
desk,  was  the  first  letter  of  his  large correspondence:


Dear Archibald,

In an oasis of work and competition, women are truly sweet and easy refreshment, don’t you agree? 
I’m afraid I had to leave early to catch the necessary plane, but I compel you, Archie: Don’t be a 
stranger! I think of us now as two men as close as our finish! I tell you, whoever said thirteenth 
was unlucky was a bigger fool than your friend,

Horst Ibelgaufts

P.S. Please make sure that Daria and Melanie get home fine and well.


Daria was his one. Terribly skinny, ribs like lobster cages and no chest to speak of, but she was a 
lovely sort: kind; soft with her kisses and with  double-jointed  wrists  she  liked  to  show  off 
 in  a  pair  of  long  silk gloves  —  set  you  back  four  clothing  coupons  at  least.  ‘I  
like  you,’ Archie remembered saying helplessly, as she replaced the gloves and put  on  her  
stockings.  She  turned,  smiled.  And  though  she  was  a professional,  he  got  the  feeling  
she  liked  him  too.  Maybe  he  should have left with her right then, run to the hills. But at 
the time it seemed impossible, too involved, what with a young wife with one in the oven (an 
hysterical, fictional pregnancy, as it turned out, a big bump full of hot air), what with his dodgy 
leg, what with the lack of hills.
Strangely,  Daria  was  the  final  pulse  of  thought  that  passed  through Archie just before he 
blacked out. It was the thought of a whore he met once  twenty  years  ago,  it  was  Daria  and  
her  smile  which  made  him cover Mo’s apron with tears of joy as the butcher saved his life. He 
had seen  her  in  his  mind:  a  beautiful  woman  in  a  doorway  with  a  come hither look; and 
realized he regretted not coming hither. If there was any chance of ever seeing a look like that 
again, then he wanted the second chance, he wanted the extra time. Not just this second, but the 
next and the next — all the time in the world.


Later  that  morning,  Archie  did  an  ecstatic  eight  circuits  of  Swiss Cottage roundabout in 
his car, his head stuck out the window while a stream of air hit the teeth at the back of his mouth 
like a wind sock. He thought: Blimey. So this is what it feels like when some bugger saves your 
life. Like you’ve just been handed a great big wad of Time.  He drove straight past his flat, 
straight past the street signs (Hendon 3¾), laughing  like  a  loon.  At  the  traffic  lights  he  
flipped  ten  pence  and smiled  when  the  result  seemed  to  agree  that  Fate  was  pulling  
him towards another life. Like a dog on a lead round a corner. Generally, women can’t do this, but 
men retain the ancient ability to leave a family and a past. They just unhook themselves, like 
removing a fake beard, and skulk discreetly back into society, changed men. Unrecognizable. In this 
manner, a new Archie is about to emerge. We have caught him

on the hop. For he is in a past-tense, future-perfect kind of mood. He is in a maybe this, maybe 
that kind of mood. Approaching a forked road, he slows down, checks his undistinguished face in the 
wing-mirror, and quite  indiscriminately  chooses  a  route  he’s  never  taken  before,  a 
residential  street  leading  to  a  place  called  Queens  Park.  Go  straight pastGo!, 
Archie-boy, he tells himself; collect two hundred and don’t for gawd’s sake look back.


Tim Westleigh (more commonly known as Merlin) finally registered the persistent ringing of a 
doorbell. He picked himself off the kitchen floor, waded  through  an  ocean  of  supine  bodies,  
and  opened  the  door  to arrive  face-to-face  with  a  middle-aged  man  dressed  head-to-toe  
in grey corduroy, holding a ten pence coin in his open palm. As Merlin was later to reflect when 
describing the incident, at any time of the day corduroy is a highly stressful fabric. Rent men 
wear it. Tax men too. History teachers add leather elbow patches. To be confronted with a mass of 
it, at nine in the a.m., on the first day of a New Year, is an apparition lethal in its sheer 
quantity of negative vibes.
‘What’s  the  deal,  man?’ Merlin  blinked  in  the  doorway  at  the  man  in corduroy  who  stood 
 on  his  doorstep  illuminated  by  winter  sunshine. ‘Encyclopedias or God?’
Archie  noted  the  kid  had  an  unnerving  way  of  emphasizing  certain words by moving his head 
in a wide circular movement from the right shoulder to the left. Then, when the circle was 
completed, he would nod several times.
‘ ’Cos if it’s encyclopedias we’ve got enough, like, information . . . and if it’s God, you’ve got 
the wrong house. We’re in a mellow place, here. Know  what  I  mean?’ Merlin  concluded,  doing  
the  nodding  thing  and moving to shut the door.
Archie shook his head, smiled and remained where he was.
‘Erm .  .  .  are you all  right?’ asked Merlin,  hand on the doorknob.  ‘Is there something I can 
do for you? Are you high on something?’
‘I saw your sign,’ said Archie.

Merlin pulled on a joint and looked amused. ‘That sign?’ He bent his head to follow Archie’s gaze. 
The white bedsheet hanging down from an  upper  window.  Across  it,  in  large  rainbow-coloured  
lettering,  was painted: WELCOME TO THE ‘END OF THE WORLD’ PARTY, 1975.
Merlin  shrugged.  ‘Yeah,  sorry,  man,  looks  like  it  wasn’t.  Bit  of  a disappointment, that. 
Or a blessing,’ he added amiably, ‘depending on your point of view.’
‘Blessing,’  said  Archie,  with  passion.  ‘Hundred  per  cent,  bona  fide
blessing.’
‘Did  you,  er,  dig  the  sign,  then?’  asked  Merlin,  taking  a  step  back behind the doorstep 
in case the man was violent as well as schiz. ‘You into  that  kind  of  scene?  It  was  kind  of  
a  joke,  you  see,  more  than anything.’
‘Caught my eye, you might say,’ said Archie, still beaming like a mad man.  ‘I  was  just  driving  
along  looking  for  somewhere,  you  know, somewhere to have another drink, New Year’s Day, hair 
of the dog and all that — and I’ve had a bit of a rough morning all in all — and it just sort of 
struck me. I flipped a coin and thought: why not?’
Merlin  looked  perplexed  at  the  turn  the  conversation  was  taking. ‘Er . . . party’s pretty 
much over, man. Besides, I think you’re a little advanced in years . . . if you know what I mean . 
. .’ Here Merlin turned gauche; underneath the dakshiki he was at heart a good middle-class boy, 
instilled with respect for his elders. ‘I mean,’ he said after a difficult pause, ‘it’s a bit of a 
younger crowd than you might be used to. Kind of a commune scene.’
‘But I was so much older then,’ sang Archie mischievously, quoting a ten-year-old Dylan track, 
arching his head round the door, ‘I’m younger than that now.’
Merlin took a cigarette from behind his ear, lit it, and frowned. ‘Look, man . . . I can’t just let 
anyone in off the street, you know? I mean, you could be the police, you could be a freak, you 
could—’
But   something   about   Archie’s   face   —   huge,   innocent,   sweetly expectant  —  reminded  
Tim  what  his  estranged  father,  the  Vicar  of Snarebrook, had to say about Christian charity 
every Sunday from his

pulpit. ‘Oh, what the hell. It’s New Year’s Day, for fuckssake. You best come in.’
Archie  sidestepped  Merlin,  and  moved  into  a  long  hallway  with  four open-doored  rooms  
branching  off  from  it,  a  staircase  leading  to another  storey,  and  a  garden  at  the  end 
 of  it  all.  Detritus  of  every variety — animal, mineral, vegetable — lined the floor; a great 
mass of bedding, under which people lay sleeping, stretched from one end of the hallway to the 
other, a red sea which grudgingly separated each time Archie took a step forward. Inside the rooms, 
in certain corners, could be witnessed the passing of bodily fluids: kissing, breast-feeding, 
fucking, throwing up — all the things Archie’s Sunday Supplement had informed him could be found in 
a commune. He toyed for a moment with  the  idea  of  entering  the  fray,  losing  himself  
between  the  bodies (he  had  all  this  new  time  on  his  hands,  masses  and  masses  of  it, 
dribbling through his fingers), but decided a stiff drink was preferable. He tackled the hallway 
until he reached the other end of the house and stepped  out  into  the  chilly  garden,  where  
some,  having  given  up  on finding a space in the warm house, had opted for the cold lawn. With a 
whisky tonic in mind, he headed for the picnic table, where something the shape and colour of Jack 
Daniels had sprung up like a mirage in a desert of empty wine bottles.
‘Mind if I . . . ?’
Two black guys, a topless Chinese girl, and a white woman wearing a toga  were  sitting  around  on 
 wooden  kitchen  chairs,  playing  rummy. Just as Archie reached for the Jack Daniels, the white 
woman shook her head and made the signal of a stubbed-out cigarette.
‘Tobacco sea, I’m afraid, darling. Some evil bastard put his fag out in some perfectly acceptable 
whisky. There’s Babycham and some other inexorable shit over here.’
Archie smiled in gratitude for the warning and the kind offer. He took a seat and poured himself a 
big glass of Liebfraumilch instead.


Many  drinks  later,  and  Archie  could  not  remember  a  time  in  his  life

when   he   had   not   known   Clive   and   Leo,   Wan-Si   and   Petronia, intimately. With his 
back turned and a piece of charcoal, he could have rendered every puckered goosepimple around 
Wan-Si’s nipples, every stray hair that fell in Petronia’s face as she spoke. By 11 a.m., he loved 
them  all  dearly,  they  were  the  children  he  had  never  had.  In  return, they told him he 
was in possession of a unique soul for a man of his age.  Everybody  agreed  some  intensely  
positive  karmic  energy  was circulating  in  and  around  Archie,  the  kind  of  thing  strong  
enough  to prompt  a  butcher  to  pull  down  a  car  window  at  the  critical  moment. And it 
turned out Archie was the first man over forty ever invited to join the commune; it turned out 
there had been talk for some time of the need  for  an  older  sexual  presence  to  satisfy  some  
of  the  more adventurous  women.  ‘Great,’  said  Archie.  ‘Fantastic.  That’ll  be  me, then.’  
He  felt  so  close  to  them  that  he  was  confused  when  around midday  their  relationship  
suddenly  soured,  and  he  found  himself stabbed  by  a  hangover  and  knee  deep  in  an  
argument  about  the Second World War, of all things.
‘I  don’t  even  know  how  we  got  into  this,’ groaned  Wan-Si,  who  had covered  up  finally  
just  when  they  decided  to  move  indoors,  Archie’s corduroy slung round her petite shoulders. 
‘Let’s not get into this. I’d rather go to bed than get into this.’
‘We  are  into  it,  we  are  into  it,’ Clive  was  ranting.  ‘This  is  the  whole problem  with  
his  generation,  they  think  they  can  hold  up  the  war  as some kind of—’
Archie  was  grateful  when  Leo  interrupted  Clive  and  dragged  the argument  into  some  
further  subset  of  the  original  one,  which  Archie had started (some unwise remark three 
quarters of an hour ago about military   service   building   up   a   young   man’s   character)   
and   then immediately regretted when it required him to defend himself at regular interludes. 
Freed finally of this obligation, he sat on the stairs, letting the row continue above while he 
placed his head in his hands.
Shame. He would have liked to have been part of a commune. If he’d played his cards right instead 
of starting a ding-dong, he might have had free love and bare breasts all over the gaff; maybe even 
a portion of allotment for growing fresh food. For a while (around 2 a.m., when

he was telling Wan-Si about his childhood) it had looked like his new life was going to be 
fabulous, and from now on he was always going to say the right thing at the right time, and 
everywhere he went people would love him. Nobody’s fault, thought Archie, mulling over the balls- 
up, nobody’s fault but my own, but he wondered whether there wasn’t some higher pattern to it. 
Maybe there will always be men who say the right thing at the right time, who step forward like 
Thespis at just the right moment of history, and then there will be men like Archie Jones who are 
just there to make up the numbers. Or, worse still, who are given  their  big  break  only  to  
come  in  on  cue  and  die  a  death  right there, centre stage, for all to see.


A  dark  line  would  now  be  drawn  underneath  the  whole  incident, underneath the whole sorry 
day, had not something happened that led to  the  transformation  of  Archie  Jones  in  every  
particular  that  a  man can be transformed; and not due to any particular effort on his part, but 
by means of the entirely random, adventitious collision of one person with  another.  Something  
happened  by  accident.  That  accident  was Clara Bowden.


But first a description: Clara Bowden was beautiful in all senses except maybe,  by  virtue  of  
being  black,  the  classical.  Clara  Bowden  was magnificently tall, black as ebony and crushed 
sable, with hair plaited in a horseshoe which pointed up when she felt lucky, down when she didn’t. 
At this moment it was up. It is hard to know whether that was significant.
She needed no bra — she was independent, even of gravity — she wore  a  red  halterneck  which  
stopped  below  her  bust,  underneath which  she  wore  her  belly  button  (beautifully)  and  
underneath  that some very tight yellow jeans. At the end of it all were some strappy heels of a 
light brown suede, and she came striding down the stairs on them like some kind of vision or, as it 
seemed to Archie as he turned to observe her, like a reared-up thoroughbred.

Now, as Archie understood it, in movies and the like it is common for someone  to  be  so  striking 
 that  when  they  walk  down  the  stairs  the crowd goes silent. In life he had never seen it. 
But it happened with Clara Bowden. She walked down the stairs in slow motion, surrounded by  
afterglow  and  fuzzy  lighting.  And  not  only  was  she  the  most beautiful  thing  he  had  
ever  seen,  she  was  also  the  most  comforting woman he had ever met. Her beauty was not a 
sharp, cold commodity. She  smelt  musty,  womanly,  like  a  bundle  of  your  favourite  clothes. 
Though she was disorganized physically — legs and arms speaking a slightly different dialect from 
her central nervous system — even her gangly demeanour seemed to Archie exceptionally elegant. She 
wore her sexuality with an older woman’s ease, and not (as with most of the girls  Archie  had  run 
 with  in  the  past)  like  an  awkward  purse,  never knowing how to hold it, where to hang it or 
when to just put it down.
‘Cheer up, bwoy,’ she said in a lilting Caribbean accent that reminded Archie of That Jamaican 
Cricketer, ‘it might never happen.’
‘I think it already has.’
Archie,  who  had  just  dropped  a  fag  from  his  mouth  which  had  been burning  itself  to  
death  anyway,  saw  Clara  quickly  tread  it  underfoot. She gave him a wide grin that revealed 
possibly her one imperfection. A complete lack of teeth in the top of her mouth.
‘Man . . . dey get knock out,’ she lisped, seeing his surprise. ‘But I tink to  myself:  come  de  
end  of  de  world,  d’Lord  won’t  mind  if  I  have  no toofs.’ She laughed softly.
‘Archie Jones,’ said Archie, offering her a Marlboro.
‘Clara.’ She whistled inadvertently as she smiled and breathed in the smoke.  ‘Archie  Jones,  you  
look  justabout  exackly  how  I  feel.  Have Clive and dem people been talking foolishness at you? 
Clive, you bin playing wid dis poor man?’
Clive grunted — the memory of Archie had all but disappeared with the effects of the wine — and 
continued where he left off, accusing Leo of misunderstanding   the   difference   between   
political   and   physical sacrifice.
‘Oh, no . . . nothing serious,’ Archie burbled, useless in the face of her

exquisite  face.  ‘Bit  of  a  disagreement,  that’s  all.  Clive  and  I  have different views 
about a few things. Generation gap, I suppose.’
Clara  slapped  him  on  the  hand.  ‘Hush  yo  mout!  You’re  nat  dat  ol’.  I seen older.’
‘I’m old enough,’ said Archie, and then, just because he felt like telling her, ‘You won’t believe 
me, but I almost died today.’
Clara raised an eyebrow. ‘You don’t say. Well, come and join de club. Dere are a lot of us about 
dis marnin’. What a strange party dis is. You know,’ she said brushing a long hand across his bald 
spot, ‘you look pretty djam good for someone come so close to St Peter’s Gate. You wan’ some 
advice?’
Archie nodded vigorously. He always wanted advice, he was a huge fan of second opinions. That’s why 
he never went anywhere without a ten pence coin.
‘Go  home,  get  some  rest.  Marnin’  de  the  world  new,  every  time. Man . . . dis life no 
easy!’
What  home?  thought  Archie.  He  had  unhooked  the  old  life,  he  was walking into unknown 
territory.
‘Man . . .’ Clara repeated, patting him on the back, ‘dis life no easy!’
She let off another long whistle and a rueful laugh, and, unless he was really going nuts, Archie 
saw that come hither look; identical to Daria’s; tinged with a kind of sadness, disappointment; 
like she didn’t have a great deal of other options. Clara was nineteen. Archibald was forty- seven.
Six weeks later they were married.



2 Teething Trouble

But Archie did not pluck Clara Bowden from a vacuum. And it’s about time people told the truth 
about beautiful women. They do not shimmer down staircases. They do not descend, as was once 
supposed, from on  high,  attached  to  nothing  other  than  wings.  Clara  was  from somewhere. 
She had roots. More specifically, she was from Lambeth (via   Jamaica)   and   she   was   
connected,   through   tacit   adolescent agreement,  to  one  Ryan  Topps.  Because  before  Clara 
 was  beautiful she was ugly. And before there was Clara and Archie there was Clara and Ryan. And 
there is no getting away from Ryan Topps. Just as a good  historian  need  recognize  Hitler’s  
Napoleonic  ambitions  in  the east in order to comprehend his reluctance to invade the British in 
the west, so Ryan Topps is essential to any understanding of why Clara did what she did. Ryan is 
indispensable. There was Clara and Ryan for  eight  months  before  Clara  and  Archie  were  drawn 
 together  from opposite ends of a staircase. And Clara might never have run into the arms of 
Archie Jones if she hadn’t been running, quite as fast as she could, away from Ryan Topps.



Poor   Ryan   Topps.   He   was   a   mass   of   unfortunate   physical characteristics. He was 
very thin and very tall, red-headed, flat-footed and freckled to such an extent that his skin was 
rarer than his freckles. Ryan  fancied  himself  as  a  bit  of  a  Mod.  He  wore  ill-fitting  
grey  suits with black polo-necks. He wore Chelsea boots after everyone else had stopped wearing 
them. While the rest of the world discovered the joys of the electronic synthesizer, Ryan swore 
allegiance to the little men with big guitars: to the Kinks, the Small Faces, the Who. Ryan Topps 
rode a green Vespa GS scooter which he polished twice a day with a baby’s  nappy  and  kept  
encased  in  a  custom-built  corrugated-iron shield. To Ryan’s way of thinking, a Vespa was not 
merely a mode of transport  but  an  ideology,  family,  friend  and  lover  all  rolled  into  one 
paragon of late forties engineering.
Ryan Topps, as one might expect, had few friends.
Clara  Bowden  was  gangly,  buck-toothed,  a  Jehovah’s  Witness,  and saw in Ryan a kindred 
spirit. A typical teenage female panopticon, she

knew everything there was to know about Ryan Topps long before they ever spoke. She knew the 
basics: same school (St Jude’s Community School, Lambeth), same height (six foot one); she knew he 
was, like her,  neither  Irish  nor  Roman  Catholic,  which  made  them  two  islands floating 
surrounded by the popish ocean of St Jude’s, enrolled in the school  by  the  accident  of  their  
postcodes,  reviled  by  teachers  and pupils alike. She knew the name of his bike, she read the 
tops of his records as they popped up over the brim of his bag. She even knew things about him he 
didn’t know: for example, she knew he was the Last Man on Earth. Every school has one, and in St 
Jude’s, as in other seats of learning, it was the girls who chose this moniker and dished it out. 
There were, of course, variations:
Mr Not for a Million Pounds.
Mr Not to Save My Mother’s Life. Mr Not for World Peace.
But, generally, the schoolgirls of St Jude’s kept to the tried and tested formula. Though Ryan 
would never be privy to the conversations of the school’s  female  changing  rooms,  Clara  knew.  
She  knew  how  the object of her affections was discussed, she kept an ear out, she knew what  he  
amounted  to  when  you  got  down  to  it,  down  amongst  the sweat and the training bras and the 
sharp flick of a wet towel.
‘Ah, Jaysus, you’re not listening. I’m saying, if he was the last man on earth!’
‘I still wouldn’t.’
‘Ah, bollocks you would!’
‘But listen: the whole bleedin’ world has been hit by the bomb, like in Japan, roight? An’ all the 
good-lookin’ men, all the rides like your man Nicky Laird, they’re all dead. They’ve all been burnt 
to a crisp. An’ all that’s left is Ryan Topps and a bunch of cockroaches.’
‘On me life, I’d rather sleep with the cockroaches.’
Ryan’s unpopularity at St Jude’s was equalled only by Clara’s. On her first day at the school her 
mother had explained to her she was about to enter the devil’s lair, filled her satchel with two 
hundred copies of the

Watchtower  and  instructed  her  to  go  and  do  the  Lord’s  work.  Week after week she shuffled 
through the school, head hung to the ground, handing out magazines, murmuring, ‘Only Jehovah 
saves’; in a school where an overexcitable pustule could send you to Coventry, a six-foot black  
missionary  in  knee  socks  attempting  to  convert  six  hundred Catholics  to  the  church  of  
the  Jehovah’s  Witnesses  equalled  social leprosy.
So  Ryan  was  red  as  a  beetroot.  And  Clara  was  black  as  yer  boot. Ryan’s  freckles  were 
 a  join-the-dots  enthusiast’s  wet  dream.  Clara could circumnavigate an apple with her front 
teeth before her tongue got anywhere near it. Not even the Catholics would forgive them for it (and 
Catholics give out forgiveness at about the same rate politicians give  out  promises  and  whores  
give  out);  not  even  St  Jude,  who  got saddled  way  back  in  the  1st  century  with  the  
patronage  of  hopeless causes  (due  to  the  tonal  similarity  between  Jude  and  Judas),  was 
prepared to get involved.


At  five  o’clock  each  day,  as  Clara  sat  in  her  house  attending  to  the message  of  the  
gospels  or  composing  a  leaflet  condemning  the heathen practice of blood transfusion, Ryan 
Topps would scoot by her open window on his way home. The Bowden living room sat just below street  
level,  and  had  bars  on  its  window,  so  all  views  were  partial. Generally,   she   would   
see   feet,   wheels,   car   exhausts,   swinging umbrellas. Such slight glimpses were often 
telling; a lively imagination could squeeze much pathos out of a frayed lace, a darned sock, a low 
swinging bag that had seen better days. But nothing affected her more deeply  than  gazing  after  
the  disappearing  tailpipe  of  Ryan’s  scooter. Lacking any name for the furtive rumblings that 
appeared in her lower abdomen on these occasions, Clara called it the spirit of the Lord. She felt  
that  somehow  she  was  going  to  save  the  heathen  Ryan  Topps. Clara meant to gather this boy 
close to her breast, keep him safe from the temptation that besets us all around, prepare him for 
the day of his redemption.  (And  wasn’t  there  somewhere,  lower  than  her  abdomen
—  somewhere  down  in  the  nether  region  of  the  unmentionables  — was  there  not  the  
half-conceived  hope  that  Ryan  Topps  might  save

her?)



If Hortense Bowden caught her daughter sitting wistfully by the barred window, listening to the 
retreating splutter of an engine while the pages of the New Bible flicked over in the breeze, she 
koofed her up-side her head and thanked her to remember that only 144,000 of the Witnesses of  
Jehovah  would  sit  in  the  court  of  the  Lord  on  Judgement  Day. Amongst which number of the 
Anointed there was no space for nasty- looking so-and-sos on motorcycles.
‘But what if we saved—’
‘Some people,’ Hortense asserted with a snort, ‘have done such a hol’ heap of sinning, it late for 
dem to be making eyes at Jehovah. It take effort to be close to Jehovah. It take devotion and 
dedication. Blessed are the pure in heart for they alone shall see God. Matthew 5:8. Isn’t dat 
right, Darcus?’
Darcus   Bowden,   Clara’s   father,   was   an   odoriferous,   moribund, salivating old man 
entombed in a bug-infested armchair from which he had  never  been  seen  to  remove  himself,  not 
 even,  thanks  to  a catheter, to visit the outdoor toilet. Darcus had come over to England 
fourteen  years  earlier  and  spent  the  whole  of  that  period  in  the  far corner  of  the  
living  room,  watching  television.  The  original  intention had been that he should come to 
England and earn enough money to enable  Clara  and  Hortense  to  come  over,  join  him  and  
settle  down. However,  on  arrival,  a  mysterious  illness  had  debilitated  Darcus Bowden. An 
illness that no doctor could find any physical symptoms of, but which manifested itself in the most 
incredible lethargy, creating in  Darcus  —  admittedly,  never  the  most  vibrant  of  men  —  a  
lifelong affection  for  the  dole,  the  armchair  and  British  television.  In  1972, enraged by 
a fourteen-year wait, Hortense decided finally to make the journey  on  her  own  steam.  Steam  
was  something  Hortense  had  in abundance. She arrived on the doorstep with the 
seventeen-year-old Clara, broke down the door in a fury and — so the legend went back in St 
Elizabeth — gave Darcus Bowden the tongue-whipping of his life. Some  say  this  onslaught  lasted  
four  hours,  some  say  she  quoted

every  book  of  the  bible  by  memory  and  it  took  a  whole  day  and  a whole  night.  What  
is  certain  is,  at  the  end  of  it  all,  Darcus  slumped deeper  into  the  recesses  of  his  
chair,  looked  mournfully  at  the television    with    whom    he    had    had    such    an    
understanding, compassionate  relationship  —  so  uncomplicated,  so  much  innocent affection — 
and a tear squeezed its way out of its duct and settled in a crag underneath his eye. Then he said 
just one word: Hmph.
Hmph  was  all  Darcus  said  or  ever  was  to  say  after.  Ask  Darcus anything; query him on 
any subject at any hour of the day and night; interrogate him; chat with him; implore him; declare 
your love for him; accuse him or vindicate him and he will give you only one answer.
‘I say, isn’t dat right, Darcus?’ ‘Hmph.’
‘An’  it  not,’  exclaimed  Hortense,  returning  to  Clara,  having  received Darcus’s grunt of 
approval, ‘dat young man’s soul you boddrin’ yourself wid! How many times must I tell you — you got 
no time for bwoys!’
For Time was running out in the Bowden household. This was 1974, and  Hortense  was  preparing  for 
 the  End  of  the  World,  which,  in  the house  diary,  she  had  marked  carefully  in  blue  
biro:  1  January  1975. This was not a solitary psychosis of the Bowdens. There were eight million 
Jehovah’s Witnesses waiting with her. Hortense was in large, albeit eccentric, company. A personal 
letter had come to Hortense (as secretary  of  the  Lambeth  branch  of  the  Kingdom  Halls),  
with  a photocopied   signature   from   William   J.   Rangeforth   of   the   largest Kingdom 
Hall in the USA, Brooklyn, confirming the date. The end of the world had been officially confirmed 
with a gold-plated letterhead, and  Hortense  had  risen  to  the  occasion  by  setting  it  in  
an  attractive mahogany frame. She had given it pride of place on a doily on top of the television 
between a glass figurine of Cinderella on her way to the Ball  and  a  tea-cosy  embroidered  with  
the  Ten  Commandments.  She had asked Darcus whether he thought it looked nice. He had hmphed his 
assent.
The  end  of  the  world  was  nigh.  And  this  was  not  —  the  Lambeth branch of the church of 
the Jehovah’s Witnesses was to be assured — like  the  mistakes  of  1914  and  1925.  They  had  
been  promised  the

entrails of sinners wrapped around the trunks of trees, and this time the  entrails  of  sinners  
wrapped  around  the  trunks  of  trees  would appear. They had waited so long for the rivers of 
blood to overflow the gutters in the high street, and now their thirst would be satiated. The time  
had  come.  This  was  the  right  date,  this  was  the  only  date,  all other dates that might 
have been proffered in the past were the result of some bad calculations: someone forgot to add, 
someone forgot to minus, someone forgot to carry the one. But now was the time. The real thing. 1 
January 1975.
Hortense, for one, was glad to hear it. The first morning of 1925 she had wept like a baby when she 
awoke to find — instead of hail and brimstone and universal destruction — the continuance of daily 
life, the regular running of the buses and trains. It had been for nothing, then, all that tossing 
and turning the previous night; waiting for


those neighbours, those who failed to listen to your warnings, to sink under a hot and terrible 
fire that shall separate their skin from their bones, shall melt the eyes in their sockets, and 
burn the babies that suckle at their mothers’ breasts . . . so many of your neighbours shall die 
that day that their bodies, if lined up side by side, will stretch three hundred times round the 
earth and on their charred remains shall the true Witnesses of the Lord walk to his side.

— The Clarion Bell, issue 245


How bitterly she had been disappointed! But the wounds of 1925 had healed,  and  Hortense  was  
once  again  ready  to  be  convinced  that apocalypse, just as the right holy Mr Rangeforth had 
explained, was round the corner. The promise of the 1914 generation still stood: This generation  
shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled  (Matthew 24:34).   Those   who   were   
alive   in   1914   would   live   to   see   the Armageddon.  It  had  been  promised.  Born  in  
1907,  Hortense  was getting old now, she was getting tired and her peers were dying off like 
flies. 1975 looked like the last chance.
Had  not  two  hundred  of  the  church’s  best  intellectuals  spent  twenty years examining the 
bible, and hadn’t this date been their unanimous conclusion? Had they not read between the lines in 
Daniel, scanned for  the  hidden  meaning  in  Revelation,  correctly  identified  the  Asian

wars  (Korea  and  Vietnam)  as  the  period  spoken  of  by  the  angel,  ‘a time, and times, and 
half a time’? Hortense was convinced these were the sign of signs. These were the final days. There 
were eight months to the end of the world. Hardly enough time! There were banners to be made,  
articles  to  be  written  (‘Will  the  Lord  Forgive  the  Onanist?’), doorsteps to be trod, bells 
to be rung. There was Darcus to think about
— who could not walk to the fridge without assistance — how was he to make it to the kingdom of the 
Lord? And in all Clara must lend a hand; there was no time for boys, for Ryan Topps, for skulking 
around, for adolescent angst. For Clara was not like other teenagers. She was the  Lord’s  child,  
Hortense’s  miracle  baby.  Hortense  was  all  of  forty- eight  when  she  heard  the  Lord’s  
voice  while  gutting  a  fish  one morning,  Montego  Bay,  1955.  Straight  away  she  threw  
down  the marlin, caught the trolley car home and submitted to her least favourite activity in 
order to conceive the child He had asked for. Why had the Lord  waited  so  long?  Because  the  
Lord  wanted  to  show  Hortense  a miracle.  For  Hortense  had  been  a  miracle  child  herself, 
 born  in  the middle of the legendary Kingston earthquake, 1907, when everybody else was busy 
dying — miracles ran in the family. Hortense saw it this way: if she could come into this world in 
the middle of a ground shaker, as  parts  of  Montego  Bay  slipped  into  the  sea,  and  fires  
came  down from  the  mountains,  then  nobody  had  no  excuses  about  nothing  no how. She liked 
to say: ‘Bein’ barn is de hardest part! Once ya done dat
— no problems.’ So now that Clara was here, old enough to help her with doorstepping, 
administration, writing speeches and all the varied business of the church of the Jehovah’s 
Witnesses, she’d better get on with  it.  No  time  for  boys.  This  child’s  work  was  just  
beginning. Hortense   —   born   while   Jamaica   crumbled   —   did   not   accept apocalypse   
before   one’s   nineteenth   birthday   as   any   excuse   for tardiness.
Yet  strangely,  and  possibly  because  of  Jehovah’s  well-documented penchant for moving in a 
mysterious manner, it was in performing the business  of  the  Lord  that  Clara  eventually  met  
Ryan  Topps  face  to face.  The  youth  group  of  the  Lambeth  Kingdom  Hall  had  been  sent 
doorstepping  on  a  Sunday  morning,  Separating  the  sheep  from  the goats (Matthew 25:31— 46), 
and Clara, detesting the young Witness

men with their bad ties and softly spoken voices, had set off alone with her  own  suitcase  to  
ring  bells  along  Creighton  Road.  The  first  few doors she received the usual pained faces: 
nice women shooing her away  as  politely  as  possible,  making  sure  they  didn’t  get  too  
close, scared they might catch religion like an infection. As she got into the poorer end of the 
street, the reaction became more aggressive; shouts came from windows or behind closed doors.
‘If that’s the bloody Jehovah’s Witnesses, tell ’em to piss off!’
Or, more imaginatively, ‘Sorry, love, don’t you know what day it is? It’s Sunday, innit? I’m 
knackered. I’ve spent all week creating the land and oceans. It’s me day of rest.’
At  No.  75  she  spent  an  hour  with  a  fourteen-year-old  physics  whizz called Colin who 
wanted to intellectually disprove the existence of God while  looking  up  her  skirt.  Then  she  
rang  No.  87.  And  Ryan  Topps answered.
‘Yeah?’
He stood there in all his red-headed, black polo-necked glory, his lip curled in a snarl.
‘I . . . I . . .’
She  tried  desperately  to  forget  what  she  was  wearing:  a  white  shirt complete  with  
throat-ruffle,  plaid  knee-length  skirt  and  sash  that proudly stated NEARER MY GOD TO THEE.
‘You  want  sommink?’  said  Ryan,  taking  a  fierce  drag  of  a  dying cigarette. ‘Or sommink?’
Clara  tried  her  widest,  buck-toothed  smile  and  went  on  to  auto-pilot. ‘Marnin’ to you, 
sir. I am from de Lambet Kingdom Hall, where we, de Witnesses of Jehovah, are waitin’ for de Lord 
to come and grace us wid  his  holy  presence  once  more;  as  he  did  briefly  —  bot  sadly, 
invisibly  —  in  de  year  of  our  farder,  1914.  We  believe  dat  when  he makes himself known 
he will be bringing wid ’im de tree-fold fires of hell in Armageddon, dat day when precious few 
will be saved. Are you int’rested in—’
‘Wot?’

Clara, close to tears at the shame of it, tried again. ‘Are you int’rested in de teachins of 
Jehovah?’
‘You wot?’
‘In Jehovah — in de teachins of d’Lord. You see, it like a staircase.’ Clara’s last resort was 
always her mother’s metaphor of the holy steps. ‘I  see  dat  you  walkin’ down  and  der’s  a  
missin’ step  comin’.  I’m  just tellin’ you:  watch  your  step!  Me  jus  wan’ share  heaven  wid 
 you.  Me nah wan’ fe see you bruk-up your legs.’
Ryan Topps leant against the door frame and looked at her for a long time through his red fringe. 
Clara felt she was closing in on herself, like a  telescope.  It  was  only  moments,  surely,  
before  she  disappeared entirely.
‘I ’ave some materials of readin’ for your perusal — ’ She fumbled with the lock of the suitcase, 
flipped the catch with her thumb but neglected to  hold  the  other  side  of  the  case.  Fifty  
copies  of  the  Watchtower spilled over the doorstep.
‘Bwoy, me kyant do nuttin’ right today—’
She fell to the ground in a rush to pick them up and scraped the skin off her left knee. ‘Ow!’
‘Your  name’s  Clara,’  said  Ryan  slowly.  ‘You’re  from  my  school,  ain’t ya?’
‘Yes, man,’ said Clara, so jubilant he remembered her name that she forgot the pain. ‘St Jude’s.’
‘I know wot it’s called.’
Clara went as red as black people get and looked at the floor.
‘Hopeless    causes.    Saint    of,’    said    Ryan,    picking    something surreptitiously from 
his nose and flicking it into a flowerpot. ‘IRA. The lot of ’em.’
Ryan  surveyed  the  long  figure  of  Clara  once  more,  spending  an inordinate amount of time 
on two sizeable breasts, the outline of their raised nipples just discernible through white 
polyester.
‘You  best  come  in,’  he  said  finally,  lowering  his  gaze  to  inspect  the

bleeding knee. ‘Put somefin’ on that.’
That  very  afternoon  there  were  furtive  fumblings  on  Ryan’s  couch (which went a good deal 
further than one might expect of a Christian girl) and the devil won another easy hand in God’s 
poker game. Things were tweaked, and pushed and pulled; and by the time the bell rang for  end  of  
school  Monday  Ryan  Topps  and  Clara  Bowden  (much  to their school’s collective disgust) were 
more or less an item; as the St Jude’s phraseology went, they were ‘dealing’ with each other. Was 
it everything  that  Clara,  in  all  her  sweaty  adolescent  invention,  had imagined?
Well, ‘dealing’ with Ryan turned out to consist of three major pastimes (in  order  of  
importance):  admiring  Ryan’s  scooter,  admiring  Ryan’s records,  admiring  Ryan.  But  though  
other  girls  might  have  balked  at dates  that  took  place  in  Ryan’s  garage  and  consisted  
entirely  of watching   him   pore   over   the   engine   of   a   scooter,   eulogizing   its 
intricacies and complexities, to Clara there was nothing more thrilling. She learnt quickly that 
Ryan was a man of painfully few words and that the  rare  conversations  they  had  would  only  
ever  concern  Ryan:  his hopes, his fears (all scooter-related) and his peculiar belief that he 
and his scooter would not live long. For some reason, Ryan was convinced of  the  ageing  fifties  
motto  ‘Live  fast,  die  young’,  and,  though  his scooter didn’t do more than 22 m.p.h. 
downhill, he liked to warn Clara in grim tones not to get ‘too involved’, for he wouldn’t be here 
long; he was ‘going out’ early and with a ‘bang’. She imagined herself holding the bleeding Ryan in 
her arms, hearing him finally declare his undying love; she saw herself as Mod Widow, wearing black 
polo-necks for a year  and  demanding  ‘Waterloo  Sunset’  be  played  at  his  funeral. Clara’s  
inexplicable  dedication  to  Ryan  Topps  knew  no  bounds.  It transcended his bad looks, tedious 
personality and unsightly personal habits.   Essentially,   it   transcended   Ryan,   for   
whatever   Hortense claimed,  Clara  was  a  teenage  girl  like  any  other;  the  object  of  her 
passion  was  only  an  accessory  to  the  passion  itself,  a  passion  that through  its  long  
suppression  was  now  asserting  itself  with  volcanic necessity.  Over  the  ensuing  months  
Clara’s  mind  changed,  Clara’s clothes changed, Clara’s walk changed, Clara’s soul changed. All 
over the  world  girls  were  calling  this  change  Donny  Osmond  or  Michael

Jackson or the Bay City Rollers. Clara chose to call it Ryan Topps.
There were no dates, in the normal sense. No flowers or restaurants, movies or parties. 
Occasionally, when more weed was required, Ryan would take her to visit a large squat in North 
London where an eighth came cheap and people too stoned to make out the features on your face acted 
like your best friends. Here, Ryan would ensconce himself in  a  hammock,  and,  after  a  few  
joints,  progress  from  his  usual monosyllabic to the entirely catatonic. Clara, who didn’t 
smoke, sat at his   feet,   admired   him,   and   tried   to   keep   up   with   the   general 
conversation around her. She had no tales to tell like the others, not like  Merlin,  like  Clive,  
like  Leo,  Petronia,  Wan-Si  and  the  others.  No anecdotes  of  LSD  trips,  of  police  
brutality  or  marching  on  Trafalgar Square. But Clara made friends. A resourceful girl, she used 
what she had  to  amuse  and  terrify  an  assorted  company  of  Hippies,  Flakes, Freaks  and  
Funky  Folk:  a  different  kind  of  extremity;  tales  of  hellfire and damnation, of the devil’s 
love of faeces, his passion for stripping skin, for red-hot-pokering eyeballs and the flaying of 
genitals — all the elaborate  plans  of  Lucifer,  that  most  exquisite  of  fallen  angels,  that 
were set for 1 January 1975.



Naturally, the thing called Ryan Topps began to push the End of the World    further    and    
further    into    the    back-rooms    of    Clara’s consciousness. So many other things were 
presenting themselves to her,  so  much  new  in  life!  If  it  were  possible,  she  felt  like  
one  of  the Anointed right now, right here in Lambeth. The more blessed she felt on earth, the 
more rarely she turned her thoughts towards heaven. In the end, it was the epic feat of long 
division that Clara simply couldn’t figure.  So  many  unsaved.  Out  of  eight  million  Jehovah’s 
 Witnesses, only 144,000 men could join Christ in heaven. The good women and good-enough men would 
gain paradise on earth — not a bad booby prize all things considered — but that still left a few 
million who failed to make the grade. Add that to the heathens; to the Jews, Catholics, Muslims; to 
the poor jungle men in the Amazon whom Clara had wept for as a child; so many unsaved. The 
Witnesses prided themselves on the  absence  of  hell  in  their  theology  —  the  punishment  was 
 torture,

unimaginable  torture  on  the  final  day,  and  then  the  grave  was  the grave.  But  to  
Clara,  this  seemed  worse  —  the  thought  of  the  Great Crowd,  enjoying  themselves  in  
earthly  paradise,  while  the  tortured, mutilated skeletons of the lost lay just under the 
topsoil.
On  the  one  side  stood  all  the  mammoth  quantities  of  people  on  the globe, unacquainted 
with the teachings of the Watchtower (some with no access to a postbox), unable to contact the 
Lambeth Kingdom Hall and receive helpful reading material about the road to redemption. On the 
other side, Hortense, her hair all wrapped up in iron rollers, tossing and turning in her sheets, 
gleefully awaiting the rains of sulphur to pour down  upon  the  sinners,  particularly  the  woman 
 at  No.  53.  Hortense tried  to  explain:  ‘Dem  dat  died  widout  de  knowing  de  Lord,  will  
be resurrected and dem will have anudder chance.’ But to Clara, it was still  an  inequitable  
equation.  Unbalanceable  books.  Faith  is  hard  to achieve, easy to lose. She became more and 
more reluctant to leave the impress of her knees in the red cushions in the Kingdom Hall. She would 
not wear sashes, carry banners or give out leaflets. She would not tell anyone about missing steps. 
She discovered dope, forgot the staircase and began taking the lift.


1 October 1974. A detention. Held back forty-five minutes after school (for  claiming,  in  a  
music  lesson,  that  Roger  Daltrey  was  a  greater musician than Johann Sebastian Bach) and as a 
result, Clara missed her four o’clock meeting with Ryan on the corner of Leenan Street. It was  
freezing  cold  and  getting  dark  by  the  time  she  got  out;  she  ran through  piles  of  
putrefying  autumn  leaves,  searched  the  length  and breadth of Leenan, but there was no sign. 
It was with dread that she approached her own front door, offering up to God a multitude of silent 
contracts (I’ll never have sex, I’ll never smoke another joint, I’ll never wear  another  skirt  
above  the  knee)  if  only  he  could  assure  her  that Ryan Topps had not rung her mother’s 
doorbell looking for shelter from the wind.
‘Clara! Come out of de cold.’
It was the voice Hortense put on when she had company — an over-

compensation of all the consonants — the voice she used for pastors and white women.
Clara closed the front door behind her, and walked in a kind of terror through the living room, 
past the framed hologram of Jesus who wept (and then didn’t), and into the kitchen.
‘Dear Lord, she look like someting de cat dragged in, hmm?’
‘Mmm,’ said Ryan, who was happily shovelling a plate of ackee and saltfish into his mouth on the 
other side of the tiny kitchen table.
Clara  stuttered,  her  buck  teeth  cutting  shapes  into  her  bottom  lip. ‘What are you doing 
here?’
‘Ha!’ cried  Hortense,  almost  triumphant.  ‘You  tink  you  can  hide  your friends  from  me  
for  ever?  De  bwoy  was  cold,  I  let  ’im  in,  we  been havin’ a nice chat, haven’t we young 
man?’
‘Mmm, yes, Mrs Bowden.’
‘Well,  don’  look  so  shock.  You’d  tink  I  was  gwan  eat  ’im  up  or someting,  eh  Ryan?’ 
said  Hortense,  glowing  in  a  manner  Clara  had never seen before.
‘Yeah,  right,’  smirked  Ryan.  And  together,  Ryan  Topps  and  Clara’s mother began to laugh.
Is there anything more likely to take the shine off an affair than when the lover strikes up a 
convivial relationship with the lovee’s mother? As the nights got darker and shorter and it became 
harder to pick Ryan out of the crowd who milled outside the school gates each day at three thirty, 
a dejected Clara would make the long walk home only to find her lover   once   more   in   the   
kitchen,   chatting   happily   with   Hortense, devouring the Bowden household’s cornucopia of 
goodies: ackee and saltfish,  beef  jerky,  chicken-rice-and-peas,  ginger  cake  and  coconut 
ices.
These  conversations,  lively  as  they  sounded  when  Clara  turned  the key in the door, always 
fell silent as she approached the kitchen. Like children  caught  out,  they  would  become  
sullen,  then  awkward,  then Ryan would make his excuses and leave. There was also a look, she 
noticed,  that  they  had  begun  to  give  her,  a  look  of  sympathy,  of

condescension;  and  not  only  that  —  they  began  to  comment  on  her clothing,  which  had  
become  steadily  more  youthful,  more  colourful; and  Ryan  —  what  was  happening  to  Ryan?  
—  shed  his  polo-neck, avoided her in school, bought a tie.
Of course, like the mother of a drug addict or the neighbour of a serial killer,  Clara  was  the  
last  to  know.  She  had  once  known  everything about Ryan — before Ryan himself knew it — she 
had been a Ryan expert. Now she was reduced to overhearing the Irish girls assert that Clara  
Bowden  and  Ryan  Topps  were  not  dealing  with  each  other  — definitively,  definitely  not  
dealing  with  each  other  —  oh  no,  not  any more.
If  Clara  realized  what  was  happening,  she  wouldn’t  allow  herself  to believe  it.  On  the 
 occasion  she  spotted  Ryan  at  the  kitchen  table, surrounded  by  leaflets  —  and  Hortense  
hurriedly  gathering  them  up and  shoving  them  into  her  apron  pocket  —  Clara  willed  
herself  to forget it. Later that month, when Clara persuaded a doleful Ryan to go through the 
motions with her in the disabled toilet, she squinted so she couldn’t see what she didn’t want to 
see. But it was there, underneath his jumper, there as he leant back on the sink was the glint of 
silver, its gleam hardly visible in the dismal light — it couldn’t be, but it was — the silver 
glint of a tiny silver cross.
It  couldn’t  be,  but  it  was.  That  is  how  people  describe  a  miracle. Somehow the 
opposites of Hortense and Ryan had met at their logical extremes,  their  mutual  predilection  for 
 the  pain  and  death  of  others meeting like perspective points on some morbid horizon. Suddenly 
the saved  and  the  unsaved  had  come  a  miraculous  full  circle.  Hortense and Ryan were now 
trying to save her.


‘Get on the bike.’
Clara had just stepped out of school into the dusk and it was Ryan, his scooter coming to a sharp 
halt at her feet.
‘Claz, get on the bike.’
‘Go ask my mudder if she wan’ get on de bike!’

‘Please,’ said Ryan, proffering the spare scooter helmet. ‘ ’Simportant. Need to talk to you. Ain’t 
much time left.’
‘Why?’ snapped Clara, rocking petulantly on her platform heels. ‘You goin’ someplace?’
‘You and me both,’ murmured Ryan. ‘The right place, ’opefully.’ ‘No.’
‘Please, Claz.’ ‘No.’
‘Please. ’Simportant. Life or death.’
‘Man . . . all right. But me nah wearin’ dat ting’ — she passed back the helmet and got astride the 
scooter — ‘not mussin’ up me hair.’
Ryan drove her across London and up to Hampstead Heath, the very top of Parliament Hill, where, 
looking down from that peak on to the sickly  orange  fluorescence  of  the  city,  carefully,  
tortuously,  and  in language that was not his own, he put forward his case. The bottom line  of  
which  was  this:  there  was  only  a  month  until  the  end  of  the world.
‘And the fing is, herself and myself, we’re just—’ ‘We!’
‘Your mum — your mum and myself,’ mumbled Ryan, ‘we’re worried. ’Bout  you.  There  ain’t  that  
many  wot  will  survive  the  last  days.  You been wiv a bad crowd, Claz—’
‘Man,’  said  Clara,  shaking  her  head  and  sucking  her  teeth,  ‘I  don’
believe dis biznezz. Dem were your friends.’
‘No, no, they ain’t. Not no more. The weed — the weed is evil. And all that lot — Wan-Si, 
Petronia.’
‘Dey my friends!’
‘They  ain’t  nice  girls,  Clara.  They  should  be  with  their  families,  not dressing like 
they do and doing things with them men in that house. You yourself shouldn’t be doin’ that, 
neither. And dressing like, like, like
—’

‘Like what?’
‘Like a whore!’ said Ryan, the word exploding from him like it was a relief to be rid of it. ‘Like 
a loose woman!’
‘Oh bwoy, I heard everyting now . . . take me home, man.’
‘They’re  going  to  get  theirs,’ said  Ryan,  nodding  to  himself,  his  arm stretched  and  
gesturing  over  London  from  Chiswick  to  Archway. ‘There’s still time for you. Who do you want 
to be with, Claz? Who d’ya want to be with? With the 144,000, in heaven, ruling with Christ? Or do 
you  want  to  be  one  of  the  Great  Crowd,  living  in  earthly  paradise, which is all right 
but . . . Or are you going to be one of them who get it in the neck, torture and death. Eh? I’m 
just separating the sheep from the goats, Claz, the sheep from the goats. That’s Matthew. And I 
think you yourself are a sheep, innit?’
‘Lemme  tell  you  someting,’  said  Clara,  walking  back  over  to  the scooter  and  taking  the 
 back  seat,  ‘I’m  a  goat.  I  like  bein’  a  goat.  I wanna be a goat. An’ I’d rather be 
sizzling in de rains of sulphur wid my  friends  than  sittin’  in  heaven,  bored  to  tears,  wid 
 Darcus,  my mudder and you!’
‘Shouldn’ta said that, Claz,’ said Ryan solemnly, putting his helmet on. ‘I really wish you ’adn’t 
said that. For your sake. He can hear us.’
‘An’ I’m tired of hearin’ you. Take me home.’
‘It’s the truth! He can hear us!’ he shouted, turning backwards, yelling above the exhaust-pipe 
noise as they revved up and scooted downhill. ‘He can see it all! He watches over us!’
‘Watch over where you goin’,’ Clara yelled back, as they sent a cluster of Hasidic Jews running in 
all directions. ‘Watch de path!’
‘Only the few — that’s wot it says — only the few. They’ll all get it — that’s what it says in 
Dyoot-er-ronomee — they’ll all get what’s comin’ and only the few—’
Somewhere   in   the   middle   of   Ryan   Topps’s   enlightening   biblical exegesis, his former 
false idol, the Vespa GS, cracked right into a 400- year-old   oak   tree.   Nature   triumphed   
over   the   presumptions   of engineering.  The  tree  survived;  the  bike  died;  Ryan  was  
hurled  one

way; Clara the other.
The principles of Christianity and Sod’s Law (also known as Murphy’s Law) are the same: Everything  
happens  to  me,  for  me.  So  if  a  man drops a piece of toast and it lands butter-side down, 
this unlucky event is interpreted as being proof of an essential truth about bad luck: that the 
toast fell as it did just to prove to you, Mr Unlucky, that there is a defining  force  in  the  
universe  and  it  is  bad  luck.  It’s  not  random.  It could  never  have  fallen  on  the  
right  side,  so  the  argument  goes, because that’s Sod’s Law. In short, Sod’s Law happens to you 
to prove to you that there is Sod’s Law. Yet, unlike gravity, it is a law that does not  exist  
whatever  happens:  when  the  toast  lands  on  the  right  side, Sod’s   Law   mysteriously   
disappears.   Likewise,   when   Clara   fell, knocking the teeth out of the top of her mouth, 
while Ryan stood up without a scratch, Ryan knew it was because God had chosen Ryan as one of the 
saved and Clara as one of the unsaved. Not because one was wearing a helmet and the other wasn’t. 
And had it happened the other way round, had gravity reclaimed Ryan’s teeth and sent them rolling 
down Primrose Hill like tiny enamel snowballs, well . . . you can bet your life that God, in Ryan’s 
mind, would have done a vanishing act.
As it was, this was the final sign Ryan needed. When New Year’s Eve rolled around, he was there in 
the living room, sitting in the middle of a circle of candles with Hortense, ardently praying for 
Clara’s soul while Darcus  pissed  into  his  tube  and  watched  the  Generation  Game  on BBC 
One. Clara, meanwhile, had put on a pair of yellow flares and a red  halterneck  top  and  gone  to 
 a  party.  She  suggested  its  theme, helped to paint the banner and hang it from the window; she 
danced and  smoked  with  the  rest  of  them  and  felt  herself,  without  undue modesty, to be 
quite the belle of the squat. But as midnight inevitably came  and  went  without  the  horsemen  
of  the  apocalypse  making  an appearance, Clara surprised herself by falling into a melancholy. 
For ridding oneself of faith is like boiling sea-water to retrieve the salt — something  is  gained 
 but  something  is  lost.  Though  her  friends  — Merlin,  Wan-Si,  et  al.  —  clapped  her  on  
the  back  and  congratulated her  for  exorcizing  those  fervid  dreams  of  perdition  and  
redemption, Clara  quietly  mourned  the  warmer  touch  she  had  waited  for  these

nineteen  years,  the  all-enveloping  bear  hug  of  the  Saviour,  the  One who was Alpha and 
Omega, both the beginning and the end; the man who was meant to take her away from all this, from 
the listless reality of  life  in  a  ground-floor  flat  in  Lambeth.  What  now  for  Clara?  
Ryan would find another fad; Darcus need only turn to the other channel; for Hortense  another  
date  would  of  course  materialize,  along  with  more leaflets, ever more faith. But Clara was 
not like Hortense.
Yet a residue, left over from the evaporation of Clara’s faith, remained. She still wished for a 
saviour. She still wished for a man to whisk her away, to choose her above others so that she might 
Walk in white with Him: for [she] was worthy. Revelation 3:4.


Perhaps  it  is  not  so  inexplicable  then,  that  when  Clara  Bowden  met Archie Jones at the 
bottom of some stairs the next morning she saw more  in  him  than  simply  a  rather  short,  
rather  chubby  middle-aged white man in a badly tailored suit. Clara saw Archie through the grey- 
green eyes of loss; her world had just disappeared, the faith she lived by  had  receded  like  a  
low  tide,  and  Archie,  quite  by  accident,  had become the bloke in the joke: the last man on 
earth.



3 Two Families


It  is  better  to  marry  than  to  burn,  says  Corinthians  I,  chapter  seven, verse nine.
Good  advice.  Of  course,  Corinthians  also  informs  us  that  we  should not muzzle the ox 
while it is treading out the grain — so, go figure.
By February 1975, Clara had deserted the church and all its biblical literalism for Archibald 
Jones, but she was not yet the kind of carefree atheist who could laugh near altars or entirely 
dismiss the teachings of

St  Paul.  The  second  dictum  wasn’t  a  problem  —  having  no  ox,  she was excluded by proxy. 
But the first was giving her sleepless nights. Was it better to marry? Even if the man was a 
heathen? There was no way  of  knowing:  she  was  living  without  props  now,  sans  safety  net. 
More  worrying  than  God  was  her  mother.  Hortense  was  fiercely opposed to the affair, on 
grounds of colour rather than of age, and on hearing of it had promptly ostracized her daughter one 
morning on the doorstep.
Clara still felt that deep down her mother would prefer her to marry an unsuitable man rather than 
live with him in sin, so she did it on impulse and begged Archie to take her as far away from 
Lambeth as a man of his  means  could  manage  —  Morocco,  Belgium,  Italy.  Archie  had clasped 
her hand and nodded and whispered sweet nothings in the full knowledge  that  the  furthest  a  man 
 of  his  means  was  going  was  a newly  acquired,  heavily  mortgaged,  two-storey  house  in  
Willesden Green. But no need to mention that now, he felt, not right now in the heat of the moment. 
Let her down gently, like.
Three  months  later  Clara  had  been  gently  let  down  and  here  they were, moving in. Archie 
scrabbling up the stairs, as usual cursing and blinding, wilting under the weight of boxes which 
Clara could carry two, three  at  a  time  without  effort;  Clara  taking  a  break,  squinting  
in  the warm May sunshine, trying to get her bearings. She peeled down to a little purple vest and 
leant against her front gate. What kind of a place was this? That was the thing, you see, you 
couldn’t be sure. Travelling in  the  front  passenger  seat  of  the  removal  van,  she’d  seen  
the  high road and it had been ugly and poor and familiar (though there were no Kingdom  Halls  or  
Episcopalian  churches),  but  then  at  the  turn  of  a corner  suddenly  roads  had  exploded  
in  greenery,  beautiful  oaks,  the houses got taller, wider and more detached, she could see 
parks, she could  see  libraries.  And  then  abruptly  the  trees  would  be  gone, reverting back 
into bus-stops as if by the strike of some midnight bell; a  signal  which  the  houses  too  
obeyed,  transforming  themselves  into smaller,  stairless  dwellings  that  sat  splay  opposite  
derelict  shopping arcades,  those  peculiar  lines  of  establishments  that  include,  without 
exception,  one  defunct  sandwich  bar  still  advertising  breakfast  one locksmith uninterested 
in marketing frills (KEYS CUT HERE)

and one permanently shut unisex hair salon, the proud bearer of some unspeakable pun (Upper Cuts or 
Fringe Benefits or Hair Today, Gone Tomorrow).
It was a lottery driving along like that, looking out, not knowing whether one was about to settle 
down for life amongst the trees or amidst the shit. Then finally the van had slowed down in front 
of a house, a nice house somewhere midway between the trees and the shit, and Clara had felt a tide 
of gratitude roll over her. It was nice, not as nice as she had hoped but not as bad as she had 
feared; it had two small gardens front and back, a doormat, a doorbell, a toilet inside . . . And 
she had not paid a high price. Only love. Just love. And whatever Corinthians might say, love is 
not such a hard thing to forfeit, not if you’ve never really felt it. She did not love Archie, but 
had made up her mind, from that first moment on the steps, to devote herself to him if he would 
take her away. And now he had; and, though it wasn’t Morocco or Belgium or  Italy,  it  was  nice  
—  not  the  promised  land  —  but  nice,  nicer  than anywhere she had ever been.
Clara  understood  that  Archibald  Jones  was  no  romantic  hero.  Three months spent in one 
stinking room in Cricklewood had been sufficient revelation.   Oh,   he   could   be   affectionate 
  and   sometimes   even charming,  he  could  whistle  a  clear,  crystal  note  first  thing  in  
the morning, he drove calmly and responsibly and he was a surprisingly competent cook, but romance 
was beyond him, passion, unthinkable. And if you are saddled with a man as average as this, Clara 
felt, he should  at  least  be  utterly  devoted  to  you  —  to  your  beauty,  to  your youth  —  
that’s  the  least  he  could  do  to  make  up  for  things.  But  not Archie. One month into 
their marriage and he already had that funny glazed  look  men  have  when  they  are  looking  
through  you.  He  had already reverted back into his bachelorhood: pints with Samad Iqbal, dinner 
with Samad Iqbal, Sunday breakfasts with Samad Iqbal, every spare moment with the man in that 
bloody place, O’Connell’s, in that bloody dive. She tried to be reasonable. She asked him: Why are 
you never here? Why do you spend so much time with the Indian? But a pat on the back, a kiss on the 
cheek, he’s grabbing his coat, his foot’s out the door and always the same old answer: Me and Sam? 
We go way back. She couldn’t argue with that. They went back to before she

was born.
No  white  knight,  then,  this  Archibald  Jones.  No  aims,  no  hopes,  no ambitions. A man 
whose greatest pleasures were English breakfasts and DIY. A dull man. An old man. And yet . . . 
good. He was a good man. And good might not amount to much, good might not light up a life,  but  
it  is  something.  She  spotted  it  in  him  that  first  time  on  the stairs,  simply,  
directly,  the  same  way  she  could  point  out  a  good mango on a Brixton stall without so much 
as touching the skin.
These  were  the  thoughts  Clara  clung  to  as  she  leant  on  her  garden gate,  three  months  
after  her  wedding,  silently  watching  the  way  her husband’s brow furrowed and shortened like 
an accordion, the way his stomach  hung  pregnant  over  his  belt,  the  whiteness  of  his  skin, 
 the blueness  of  his  veins,  the  way  his  ‘elevens’  were  up  —  those  two ropes of flesh 
that appear on a man’s gullet (so they said in Jamaica) when his time was drawing to a close.
Clara  frowned.  She  hadn’t  noticed  these  afflictions  at  the  wedding. Why not? He had been 
smiling and he wore a white polo-neck, but no, that  wasn’t  it  —  she  hadn’t  been  looking  for 
 them  then,  that  was  it. Clara had spent most of her wedding day looking at her feet. It had 
been a hot day, 14 February, but unusually warm, and there had been a  wait  because  the  world  
had  wanted  to  marry  that  day  in  a  little registry office on Ludgate Hill. Clara remembered 
slipping off the petite brown heels she was wearing and placing her bare feet on the chilly floor,  
making  sure  to  keep  them  firmly  planted  either  side  of  a  dark crack in the tile, a 
balancing act upon which she had randomly staked her future happiness.
Archie  meanwhile  had  wiped  some  moisture  from  his  upper  lip  and cursed a persistent 
sunbeam that was sending a trickle of salty water down his inside leg. For his second marriage he 
had chosen a mohair suit  with  a  white  polo-neck  and  both  were  proving  problematic.  The 
heat prompted rivulets of sweat to spring out all over his body, seeping through  the  polo-neck  
to  the  mohair  and  giving  off  an  unmistakable odour  of  damp  dog.  Clara,  of  course,  was 
 all  cat.  She  wore  a  long brown woollen Jeff Banks dress and a perfect set of false teeth; the 
dress was backless, the teeth were white, and the overall effect was

feline; a panther in evening dress; where the wool stopped and Clara’s skin  started  was  not  
clear  to  the  naked  eye.  And  like  a  cat  she responded  to  the  dusty  sunbeam  that  was  
coursing  through  a  high window on to the waiting couples. She warmed her bare back in it, she 
almost  seemed  to  unfurl.  Even  the  registrar,  who  had  seen  it  all  — horsy  women  
marrying  weaselly  men,  elephantine  men  marrying owlish women — raised an eyebrow at this most 
unnatural of unions as they approached his desk. Cat and dog.
‘Hullo, Father,’ said Archie.
‘He’s a registrar, Archibald, you old flake,’ said his friend Samad Miah Iqbal,  who,  along  with  
his  wife  Alsana,  had  been  called  in  from  the exile  of  the  Wedding  Guest  Room  to  
witness  the  contract.  ‘Not  a Catholic priest.’
‘Right. Of course. Sorry. Nervous.’
The stuffy registrar said, ‘Shall we get on? We’ve got a lot of you to get through today.’
This and little more had constituted the ceremony. Archie was passed a  pen  and  put  down  his  
name  (Alfred  Archibald  Jones),  nationality (English) and age (47). Hovering for a moment over 
the box entitled ‘Occupation’,  he  decided  upon  ‘Advertising:  (Printed  Leaflets)’,  then 
signed  himself  away.  Clara  wrote  down  her  name  (Clara  Iphegenia Bowden),   nationality   
(Jamaican)   and   age   (19).   Finding   no   box interested in her occupation, she went straight 
for the decisive dotted line, swept her pen across it, and straightened up again, a Jones. A Jones 
like no other that had come before her.
Then  they  had  gone  outside,  on  to  the  steps,  where  a  breeze  lifted second-hand confetti 
and swept it over new couples, where Clara met her only wedding guests formally for the first time: 
two Indians, both dressed  in  purple  silk.  Samad  Iqbal,  a  tall,  handsome  man  with  the 
whitest teeth and a dead hand, who kept patting her on the back with the one that worked.
‘My  idea  this,  you  know,’ he  repeated  again  and  again.  ‘My  idea,  all this marriage 
business. I have known the old boy since — when?’
‘1945, Sam.’

‘That’s what I am trying to tell your lovely wife, 1945 — when you know a  man  that  long,  and  
you’ve  fought  alongside  him,  then  it’s  your mission  to  make  him  happy  if  he  is  not.  
And  he  wasn’t!  Quite  the opposite until you made an appearance! Wallowing in the shit-heap, if 
you  will  pardon  the  French.  Thankfully,  she’s  all  packed  off  now. There’s only one place 
for the mad, and that’s with others like them,’ said  Samad,  losing  steam  halfway  through  the  
sentence,  for  Clara clearly had no idea what he was talking about. ‘Anyway, no need to dwell on . 
. . My idea, though, you know, all this.’
And then there was his wife, Alsana, who was tiny and tight-lipped and seemed to disapprove of 
Clara somehow (though she could only be a few years older); said only ‘Oh yes, Mrs Jones’ or ‘Oh 
no, Mrs Jones’, making Clara so nervous, so sheepish, she felt compelled to put her shoes back on.
Archie felt bad for Clara that it wasn’t a bigger reception. But there was no one else to invite. 
All other relatives and friends had declined the wedding   invitation;   some   tersely,   some   
horrified;   others,   thinking silence the best option, had spent the past week studiously 
stepping over  the  mail  and  avoiding  the  phone.  The  only  well-wisher  was Ibelgaufts, who 
had neither been invited nor informed of the event, but from whom, curiously, a note arrived in the 
morning mail:


14 February 1975 Dear Archibald,
Usually, there is something about weddings that brings out the misanthrope in me, but today, as I 
attempted to save a bed of petunias from extinction, I felt a not inconsiderable warmth at the 
thought of the union of one man and one woman in lifelong cohabitation. It is truly remarkable that 
we humans undertake such an impossible feat, don’t you think? But to be serious for a moment: as 
you know, I am a man whose profession it is to look deep inside of ‘Woman’, and, like a 
psychiatrist, mark her with a full bill of health or otherwise. And I feel sure, my friend (to 
extend a metaphor), that you have explored your lady-
